VCE UNITS
3&4
INTERACTIVE
TEXTBOOK
INCLUDED
Cambridge Senior Science
Chemistry
Brett Drummond
Simon Maaser
Lauren Angley
Scott Fraser
Trent Lucas
Zhen Wang
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al © Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
Shaftesbury Road, Cambridge CB2 8EA, United Kingdom
One Liberty Plaza, 20th Floor, New York, NY 10006, USA
477 Williamstown Road, Port Melbourne, VIC 3207, Australia
314–321, 3rd Floor, Plot 3, Splendor Forum, Jasola District Centre, New Delhi – 110025, India
103 Penang Road, #05–06/07, Visioncrest Commercial, Singapore 238467
Cambridge University Press is part of Cambridge University Press & Assessment,
a department of the University of Cambridge.
We share the University’s mission to contribute to society through the pursuit of
education, learning and research at the highest international levels of excellence.
www.cambridge.org
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2024
This publication is in copyright. Subject to statutory exception
and to the provisions of relevant collective licensing agreements,
no reproduction of any part may take place without the written
permission of Cambridge University Press & Assessment.
First published 2024
20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
Cover designed by Loupe Studio
Text designed by Shaun Jury
Typeset by QBS Learning
Printed in China by C&C Offset Printing Co., Ltd.
A catalogue record for this book is available from the National Library of Australia at www.nla.gov.au
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5 Paperback
Additional resources for this publication at www.cambridge.edu.au/GO
Reproduction and Communication for educational purposes
The Australian Copyright Act 1968 (the Act) allows a maximum of
one chapter or 10% of the pages of this publication, whichever is the greater,
to be reproduced and/or communicated by any educational institution
for its educational purposes provided that the educational institution
(or the body that administers it) has given a remuneration notice to
Copyright Agency Limited (CAL) under the Act.
For details of the CAL licence for educational institutions contact:
Copyright Agency Limited
Level 12, 66 Goulburn Street
Sydney NSW 2000
Telephone: (02) 9394 7600
Facsimile: (02) 9394 7601
Email: memberservices@copyright.com.au
Reproduction and Communication for other purposes
Except as permitted under the Act (for example a fair dealing for the purposes of study, research, criticism
or review) no part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, communicated or
transmitted in any form or by any means without prior written permission. All inquiries should be made to the
publisher at the address above.
Cambridge University Press has no responsibility for the persistence or accuracy of URLS for external or third-
party internet websites referred to in this publication and does not guarantee that any content on such websites
is, or will remain, accurate or appropriate. Information regarding prices, travel timetables and other factual
information given in this work is correct at the time of first printing but Cambridge University Press does not
guarantee the accuracy of such information thereafter.
Please be aware that this publication may contain images of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people who
are now deceased. Several variations of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander terms and spellings may also
appear; no disrespect is intended. Please note that the terms ‘Indigenous Australians’ and ‘Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander peoples’ may be used interchangeably in this publication.
Cambridge University Press acknowledges the Australian Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples of this
nation. We acknowledge the traditional custodians of the lands on which our company is located and where we
conduct our business. We pay our respects to ancestors and Elders, past and present. Cambridge University Press
is committed to honouring Australian Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples’ unique cultural and spiritual
relationships to the land, waters and seas and their rich contribution to society.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
iii
About the authors
Brett Drummond is co-lead author of the VCE Chemistry team. He is a science
communicator and co-founder of MStranslate, an organisation that communicates
research summaries on multiple sclerosis (MS). He has been a private tutor for VCE
Biology and Chemistry.
Simon Maaser is co-lead author of the VCE Chemistry team and Head of Science
and Technology at Melbourne Grammar School, where he teaches 7–10 Science,
VCE Biology and VCE Chemistry. He is a VCAA Assessor, has worked on
curriculum reviews and has been a private tutor for VCE Biology and Chemistry.
Lauren Angley is an experienced chemistry teacher, having taught VCE Chemistry
for nine years at Our Lady of Mercy College. Before commencing her career as a
teacher, Lauren worked as a laboratory-based researcher in biochemistry at The
University of Melbourne. Having a passion for encouraging students to pursue a
career in science, Lauren has also been involved in the establishment and leading of
a STEAM extension program at her school.
Scott Fraser has a wide-ranging set of experiences starting with a biomedical
science undergraduate degree, followed by a Grad. Dip. Chemistry and PhD in
chemistry. He has taught chemistry and biochemistry subjects across all levels of
study and also has his own private teaching company that helps guide and support
students towards medical careers.
Trent Lucas is a VCE and IB Chemistry teacher who has worked across a range of
Victorian secondary school settings. He has extensive experience as a VCAA and
VCE external examination marker and has been involved in VCE Chemistry study
design reviews.
Zhen (James) Wang is a dedicated educator who is passionate about teaching
Chemistry to high school students. He holds a PhD in Organic Chemistry and
has previously worked as a post-doctoral fellow in multiple universities. He has
extensive classroom experience in delivering VCE Chemistry and enjoys the
challenge of communicating complex scientific concepts in an elegant manner.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
iv
Contents
About the authors iii
Overview: How to use this resource vii
Overview: Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander knowledge,
cultures and history xii
Concept maps for Units 3&4 xiii
Acknowledgements xvii
UNIT
3
How can design and innovation help
to optimise chemical processes?
Chapter 1 Carbon-based fuels 2
1A Types of fuels 5
1B Production of chemical energy in nature 1C Exothermic and endothermic reactions 17
24
Chapter 1 review 34
Chapter 2 Measuring changes in chemical reactions 2A Measuring greenhouse gases 41
2B Measuring energy released from chemical reactions 2C Measuring energy from food 38
52
65
Chapter 2 review 70
Chapter 3 Galvanic cells 74
3A Reduction and oxidation 78
3B Writing redox equations 88
3C Features of galvanic cells 3D Using the electrochemical series 98
110
Chapter 3 review 122
Chapter 4 Fuel cells 128
4A Fuel cells 131
4B Faraday’s laws 137
Chapter 4 review 143
Chapter 5 Rates of reaction 5A What causes a chemical reaction? 5B Factors affecting reaction rate 148
151
158
Chapter 5 review 169
Chapter 6 Equilibrium 174
6A What is equilibrium? 178
6B The reaction quotient and equilibrium constant 181
6C Le Châtelier’s principle 189
Chapter 6 review 200
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
v
UNIT
4
Chapter 7 Electrolytic cells 206
7A Features of electrolytic cells 7B Predicting the products of electrolysis 7C Commercial electrolytic cells 225
7D Faraday’s laws of electrolysis 210
217
234
Chapter 7 review 239
Unit 3 Revision exercise 244
How are carbon-based compounds designed
for purpose?
Chapter 8 Structure and properties of organic compounds 8A Structural diversity in organic compounds 8B Molecules of carbon 271
8C Functional groups: haloalkanes, amines and alcohols 252
257
287
8D Functional groups: aldehydes, ketones, carboxylic acids,
esters and amides 300
8E Physical properties of organic compounds 317
Chapter 8 review 327
Chapter 9 Reactions of organic compounds 9A Organic reactions: substitution, addition and oxidation 9B Organic reactions: condensation and hydrolysis 9C Sustainable production of organic compounds 332
336
354
367
Chapter 9 review 379
Chapter 10 Laboratory analysis of organic compounds 10A Analysis of functional groups 10B Analysis of purity and concentration 384
387
400
Chapter 10 review 414
Chapter 11 Instrumental analysis of organic compounds 11A Mass spectrometry 424
11B Infrared spectroscopy 430
11C Nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy 420
435
11D Chromatography 444
Chapter 11 review 452
Chapter 12 Medicinal chemistry 458
12A Organic compounds as medicines 12B Enzymes
462
474
Chapter 12 review 490
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
vi
Chapter 13 Scientific investigations 496
13A Investigative planning and design 500
13B Scientific evidence 509
13C Scientific communication 520
Chapter 13 review 524
Unit 4 Revision exercise 533
Appendix: Data 541
Periodic table 541
Electrochemical series 542
Glossary 543
Index 554
Permissions acknowledgements 561
Answers are available in the Interactive Textbook and the Teacher
Resources.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
vii
5A 5A.1 5A.2 5A.3 5A.4 Learning intentions are turned into
Success Criteria (achievement
standards) at the end of the chapter
and are assessed in the Chapter
review and tracked in the Checklists
148
Overview: How to use this resource
UNIT
HOW CAN DESIGN AND INNOVATION HELP TO
3
OPTIMISE CHEMICAL PROCESSES?
This overview guides you through all the components of the print and PDF textbooks, the Interactive
Textbook (ITB) and the teacher resources in the Online Teaching Suite (OTS). Users of the award-
CHAPTER
winning Cambridge Science 7–10 for the Victorian Curriculum will recognise some similarities with this
5
RATES OF REACTION
senior science resource, including the hosting of the digital material on the Edjin platform, which was
developed by Cambridge HOTmaths and is already being used successfully by thousands of teachers and
students across Victoria.
Print book features
Learning intentions
Introduction
INTRODUCTION
VIDEO
You probably know that reactions are occurring all around us. This chapter
RATES OF
will examine the nature of these reactions, what conditions need to be met for
REACTION
a reaction to occur and what can be altered to increase the rate of reactions.
In the Curriculum table at the start of each chapter, the Study Design dot points are translated into Learning
You will learn about reaction rate and the factors that can speed up a reaction. By
extension, you will also be able to infer the factors that slow down a reaction. You
Intentions, describing what students should be able to do by the end of the chapter.
will also learn about catalysts and how they provide an alternative reaction pathway.
Black text indicates
the portion of the
dot point covered
by the section
shown in the
second column
Curriculum
Area of Study 2 Outcome 2
How can the rate and yield of chemical reactions be optimised?
Study Design: Learning intentions – at the end of the chapter I will be able to:
• Factors affecting the
frequency and success of
reactant particle collisions
and the rate of a chemical
reaction in open and
closed systems, including
temperature, surface
area, concentration, gas
pressures, presence of a
catalyst, activation energy
and orientation
What causes a chemical reaction?
Differentiate between open and closed systems
Outline how reactions proceed differently in open and
closed systems
Describe the factors that comprise collision theory
Describe how the rate of a reaction can be monitored
White text indicates
the portion of the
dot point covered
by other sections
Relevant Study Design dot points are repeated at the start of each section in the chapter, and an overall
curriculum grid is provided in the teacher resources.
4 CONCEPT MAP
Concept maps
Concept maps display each chapter’s structure with annotations
emphasising interconnectedness, providing a great memory aid.
The versions in the ITB are hyperlinked and offer an alternative
way of navigating through the course. An overall look at all
concept maps of Units 3 & 4 is also provided after this overview.
Links
20 CHAPTER 1 CARBON-BASED FUELS
The interconnectedness of topics in VCE Chemistry is
demonstrated through links between sections, displayed in
Oxidised
In aerobic cellular respiration, glucose is oxidised to form carbon dioxide and water. The
describes
chemical reaction for aerobic cellular respiration is:
a chemical
the margins. In the ITB, these are hyperlinks that provide an
species that
glucose + oxygen → water + carbon dioxide
has undergone
oxidation – that
0 +1 –2 0 +1 –2 +4–2
alternative way of navigating through the course.
is, it has lost
electrons in a
C6H12O6(aq) + 6O2(g) → 6H2O(l) + 6CO2(g)
reaction
NOTE
You should notice from this equation that the products of this chemical reaction are the inputs
for the photosynthesis reaction.
You will recall from Unit 2, and this will again be covered in Section 3A, that oxidation
means a loss of electrons. If you look at the oxidation numbers, in red, shown above the
balanced chemical equation, you will see that the carbon changes from a ‘0’ to a ‘+4’
oxidation number. This means it is losing electrons. Conversely, the oxygen gas reactant is
being reduced, as it changes oxidation number from ‘0’ to ‘+2’.
As glucose can be broken down to release the energy required for all metabolic reactions
Concept map
1A Types of fuels
Fossil fuels versus biofuels
Solar energy
Photosynthesis
Biofuel production
Crop harvesting
Industrial processing
Human consumption Energy
CO2
crops
H2O
Biofertiliser Electrical and/or
thermal energy
Digester
Organic
wastes
Anaerobic
digestion
Biogas
Natural gas
pipeline
Understanding processes that
plants and animals use to produce
or gain energy from fuels
1B Production of chemical energy in nature
Mitochondrion
Animal cell
Adenosine
triphosphate
Cellular
respiration
ATP
Carbon
dioxide
CO2
Energy for life processes
Plant cell
Water
H2O
Oxygen
O2
Glucose
C6H12O6
Photosynthesis Photosynthesis
Light energy
Chloroplast
1C Exothermic and endothermic reactions
Ea
Energy
Reactants
Energy
Ea
Products
Reactants
∆H
∆H
Products
Progress of reaction Progress of reaction
See the Interactive Textbook for an interactive version of this concept map
interlinked with all concept maps for the course.
Combustion
of fuels
as exothermic
reactions
These processes
are examples
of exothermic
reactions
UNIT 2
LINK
3A REDUCTION
AND OXIDATION LINK
LINK
1A TYPES OF
FUELS
1C EXOTHERMIC
AND
ENDOTHERMIC
REACTIONS
5B FACTORS
AFFECTING
REACTION RATE
LINK
LINK
occurring in our bodies’ cells, it is a type of fuel. Like the other fuels you learned about in
Section 1A, it undergoes a combustion reaction that releases energy, which means it is an
exothermic reaction. Exothermic combustion reactions will be discussed in more detail in
Section 1C.
As in photosynthesis, there are many factors which affect the rate of cellular respiration
reactions, such as temperature, glucose availability, oxygen concentration and enzyme
(catalyst) concentration. Factors affecting the frequency and success of collisions between
reactants, and the subsequent rate of chemical reactions, are explored further in Section 5B.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Oxidation
Drummond et al number
a measure of
Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
the degree of
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
viii
17
1B
1B PRODUCTION OF CHEMICAL ENERGy IN NATURE
17
Production of chemical energy
1B
in nature
1B PRODUCTION OF CHEMICAL ENERGy IN NATURE
Study Design coverage for section Glossary terms in the section
Study Design:
Production of chemical energy
Glossary:
• Photosynthesis as the process that converts
Aerobic
in nature
light energy into chemical energy and as a
Anabolic
source of glucose and oxygen for respiration
Catabolic
in living things:
Cellular respiration
Study Design:
Glossary:
6CO 2 (g) + 6H 2 O(l) → C 6 H 12 O 6 (aq) + 6O 2 (g)
Oxidation number
• Photosynthesis as the process that converts
Aerobic
• Oxidation of glucose as the primary
Oxidised
light energy into chemical energy and as a
Anabolic
carbohydrate energy source, including the
source of glucose and oxygen for respiration
Catabolic
in living things:
balanced equation for cellular respiration:
Cellular respiration
6CO 2 (g) + 6H 2 O(l) → C 6 H 12 O 6 (aq) + 6O 2 (g)
C 6 H 12 O 6 (aq) + 6O 2 (g) → 6CO 2 (g) + 6H 2 O(l)
Oxidation number
• Oxidation of glucose as the primary
Oxidised
carbohydrate energy source, including the
balanced equation for cellular respiration:
ENGAGE
C 6 H 12 O 6 (aq) + 6O 2 (g) → 6CO 2 (g) + 6H 2 O(l)
The carbon economy
Have you heard of the carbon economy? Perhaps you’re more familiar with the term
ENGAGE
‘carbon footprint’. Both of these relate to carbon dioxide emissions. As you learned in
The carbon economy
Unit 2, carbon dioxide emissions (a type of greenhouse gas) are primarily responsible
for global warming and climate change. Carbon dioxide is released naturally through
Have you heard of the carbon economy? Perhaps you’re more familiar with the term
LINK UNIT 2
‘carbon footprint’. Both of these relate to carbon dioxide emissions. As you learned in
processes like cellular respiration, which you will learn more about in this chapter,
LINK UNIT 2
LINK
1C EXOTHERMIC
AND
ENDOTHERMIC
REACTIONS
Unit 2, carbon dioxide emissions (a type of greenhouse gas) are primarily responsible
and fermentation. However, other human activities, such as deforestation and the
18 CHAPTER 1 CARBON-BASED FUELS
for global warming and climate change. Carbon dioxide is released naturally through
burning of fossil fuels, which you will learn more about in Section 1C, have been the
processes like cellular respiration, which you will learn more about in this chapter,
main producers of the gas. For decades, efforts have been made to monitor and lower
and fermentation. However, other human activities, such as deforestation and the
EXPLAIN
these emissions. Governments and industries are continually improving the efficiency
1C EXOTHERMIC
burning of fossil fuels, which you will learn more about in Section 1C, have been the
Photosynthesis
AND
LINK
of photosynthesis, which is the way carbon dioxide is naturally removed from the
ENDOTHERMIC
main producers of the gas. For decades, efforts have been made to monitor and lower
REACTIONS
Anabolic
Photosynthesis is an anabolic chemical reaction in which the Sun’s light energy is used to
atmosphere. The benefits of this improvement will be twofold. The world’s population
these emissions. Governments and industries are continually improving the efficiency
a biochemical
convert the inorganic compounds carbon dioxide (CO 2 ) and water (H 2 O) into the organic
process requiring
is growing rapidly and greater quantities of food will be needed to support future
of photosynthesis, which is the way carbon dioxide is naturally removed from the
energy, where
compound glucose (C 6 H 12 O 6 ). Glucose can then be used as a source of energy by the cells
atmosphere. The simple molecules
generations. Not only will there be less carbon dioxide in the atmosphere, but it is
benefits of this improvement will be twofold. The world’s population
of living organisms, enabling growth and reproduction.
combine to
thought that increasing the efficiency of photosynthesis will mean more nutrient-rich
is growing rapidly and greater quantities of food will be needed to support future
generate complex
Photosynthesis consists of a series of steps (a biochemical pathway), with each step
molecules
generations. Not only will there be less carbon dioxide in the atmosphere, but it is
crops and increased crop yields. Governments and industries also want to increase
controlled by a different enzyme. The overall process of photosynthesis can be written as
thought that increasing the efficiency of photosynthesis will mean more nutrient-rich
the production of biomass, a sustainable and renewable energy resource, in the hope
both a word equation and a balanced chemical equation:
crops and increased crop yields. Governments and industries also want to increase
that this will reduce our reliance on fossil fuels and again reduce the volume of carbon
the production of biomass, a sustainable and renewable energy resource, in the hope
Glossary definitions dioxide in the atmosphere.
carbon dioxide + water Terms in the glossary
oxygen + glucose
that this will reduce our reliance on fossil fuels and again reduce the volume of carbon
light energy
light energy
light energy
dioxide in the atmosphere.
6 6 6
CO (g) H O(l) 6 6 6
+ 6 6 6
2 2 2
+  →  C H O (aq)
CO (g) H O(l) CO (g) H O(l) 1B PRODUCTION OF CHEMICAL ENERGy IN NATURE
2 2 2
2 2 2
+  →  C H O (aq)
+  →  C H O (aq)
O (g)
O (g)
O (g)
+
+ 6 12 6
+ 6 12 6
+ 6 12 6
chlorophyll
chlorophyll
chlorophyll
19
The oxygen released is
Check-in questions – Set 1
considered a waste product
from a photosynthesis
Chapter sections
Chapters are divided into
numbered sections, each with
a consistent set of features.
Engage
At the start of each section, these
boxes provide points of interest
for the topic, emphasising its
place in chemistry. This material,
though not assessable, can be used
as examples of applications.
Explain
This icon marks the start of
essential content that is assessed.
Glossary
Scientific terms are highlighted
in the text; definitions are given
in the margin of the print and
PDF textbooks, or on mouseover
in the ITB; and the terms are
listed at the start of each chapter
and section.
Water
(H2O)
O
H H
O
H H
O
H H
O
H H
Check-in questions
1 What is the purpose of photosynthesis?
perspective. However, this
is a very important reactant
2 a Write the word equation for photosynthesis.
Cellular respiration
for cellular respiration in both
Each section in the chapter
the transformation
b Write the simplified balanced chemical equation for photosynthesis.
of the chemical
Light energy
plants and animals. The glucose
energy stored
O O
has one or more sets of check-
in glucose into
O O
produced from photosynthesis
62 CHAPTER 2 MEASURING CHANGES IN CHEMICAL REACTIONS
usable energy
O O
O O
Oxygen
in plants is the key reactant
O OC
in questions, for formative
(ATP) for cells
Cellular respiration
Figure 1B–1 The rise in carbon dioxide levels in the atmosphere is responsible for global warming
Carbon
O O
O O
(O2)
required for cellular respiration
O OC
Figure 1B–1 The rise in carbon dioxide levels in the atmosphere is responsible for global warming
and climate change.
dioxide
in living organisms, as you
assessment. Full answers are
and climate change.
Like photosynthesis, cellular respiration occurs as a series of steps in a biochemical
O OC
WORKSHEET
(CO2)
will see later in this chapter.
2B–2
DOC
pathway, with each step controlled by a different enzyme. You do not need to be familiar
O OC
As you learned in Section 1A,
provided in the digital resources.
2B SKILLS
1A TYPES OF
LINK
CALIBRATING
FUELS
O OC
Glucose
with any of these steps in this chemistry course. The purpose of cellular respiration is the
glucose is also the key input for
CALORIMETERS
(C6H12O6)
fermentation in the production
catabolic breakdown of glucose, which releases the chemical energy in a form more usable
Random versus systematic errors
Skills
VIDEO 2B–1
of bioethanol from plants
for cells, as a molecule called adenosine triphosphate (ATP).
SKILLS: RANDOM
and yeast.
VERSUS
In the context of chemistry, particularly in an experiment such as calorimetry, two types
Skills boxes in every section
SYSTEMATIC
There are two types of cellular respiration. The first occurs in the absence of oxygen
of errors commonly occur: random and systematic.
Photosynthesis is an example
O
O
ERRORS
O H H
H H
(anaerobic) and is commonly referred to as fermentation. You learned about this in
of an endothermic reaction,
provide advice and guidance
H H
Water
O
Water
O
H
H
which you will learn about in
Random errors occur unpredictably and differ in each measurement. They’re caused
Section 1A. This occurs in certain plants and yeast, resulting in the production of ethanol
1C EXOTHERMIC
O
H H
on how to answer and prepare
H H
Section 1C.
AND
LINK
by unpredictable fluctuations in the experimental process, such as variations in
(bioethanol) and carbon dioxide, according to the following equation:
ENDOTHERMIC
REACTIONS
for questions, especially in
temperature, slight inconsistencies in material, or even human error during observation.
Figure 1B–2 The initial reactants and final products of
glucose → ethanol + carbon dioxide
In a calorimetry experiment, a random error could be the minor fluctuation in the
photosynthesis
58 examinations. The ITB has guided
CHAPTER 2 MEASURING CHANGES IN CHEMICAL REACTIONS
C 6 H 12 O 6 (aq) → 2CH 3 CH 2 OH(aq) + 2CO 2 (g)
temperature readings of the calorimeter. While these errors can’t be completely
video versions of these, which
NOTE
eliminated, they can be minimised by conducting multiple trials and calculating an
In animals, a slightly different form of anaerobic cellular respiration takes place. It is often
provide extra comments and an
average result.
There are many factors that affect the rate of the photosynthesis reaction, such as temperature,
VIDEO
called lactic acid fermentation and results in the production of lactic acid (lactate ions),
light availability, water availability, carbon dioxide concentration and enzyme (catalyst)
WORKED
Worked example 2B–5: Calculating the calibration factor of a solution
5B FACTORS
concentration. Factors affecting the frequency and success of collisions between reactants, and
alternative medium of delivery.
which is associated with muscle cramping. This chemical reaction is represented according
EXAMPLE 2B–5
On the other hand, systematic errors are predictable and consistent in each
AFFECTING
LINK
calorimeter by chemical calibration
the subsequent rate of chemical reactions, are explored further in Section 5B.
REACTION RATE
to the following equation:
measurement. They’re caused by faulty equipment, incorrect calibration or bias in
Worked examples
Worked examples are provided for
questions requiring computation –
for example, in stoichiometry.
the method of measurement. For instance, if the calorimeter isn’t perfectly insulated,
A 1.00 g sample of potassium nitrate (M(KNO3) = 101.1 g mol–1) was dissolved in a
glucose → lactic acid
heat may escape or enter, leading to a consistent underestimation or overestimation of
solution calorimeter containing water with an initial temperature of 20.06°C. Once
C 6 H 12 O 6 (aq) → 2CH 3 CH(OH)COOH(aq)
energy changes in the system, respectively. This is a systematic error. Systematic errors
the potassium nitrate was completely dissolved, a final temperature of 18.05°C was
can be identified because they skew results in a particular direction and their effect
recorded. Potassium nitrate dissolves in water according to the following equation:
The second form of cellular respiration occurs in the presence of oxygen ( aerobic ). This
remains consistent irrespective of the number of trials. To eliminate systematic errors,
occurs in many plant and animal cells with some steps occurring inside the mitochondria,
KNO3(s) → K+(aq) + NO3
–(aq) ΔH = +34.9 kJ mol–1
equipment should be properly calibrated, and methods should be evaluated and adjusted
the energy powerhouse of the cell. Aerobic cellular respiration results in a much greater
if necessary.
Determine the calibration factor of the calorimeter in J°C–1
yield of energy per mole of glucose than that yielded by anaerobic cellular respiration.
.
The difference between these two types of errors can be demonstrated visually, as shown
Solution
below.
O2 + C6H12O6
Logic Process
Catabolic
a biochemical
process releasing
energy, in
which complex
molecules are
broken down
into simple
molecules
LINK 1A TYPES OF
FUELS
Aerobic
an organism
or process that
requires the
presence of free
oxygen
Step 1 Photosynthesis
Write down everything you have
Have:
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Systematic error
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023and need, ensuring to convert
m(KNO3) = 1.00 g
Chemical energy
Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
Light energy
units where appropriate
M(KNO ) = 101 1 gmol–1
(ATP)
ix
12 CHAPTER 1 CARBON-BASED FUELS
1A TyPES OF FUELS
13
Charts, diagrams and tables
Detailed charts integrating text and
diagrams, and illustrated tables,
feature throughout the print book.
Fermentation
the process by
which glucose
is broken down
in the absence
of oxygen to
produce energy
(ATP); also
called anaerobic
cellular
respiration
Bioethanol
a type of biofuel
produced by
fermentation in
plants and yeast
Bioethanol
Ethanol is a two-carbon hydrocarbon containing a hydroxyl (–OH) functional group. Its
molecular formula, structural formula and semi-structural formula are shown in Table 1A–2.
Table 1A–2 The molecular, structural and semi-structural formulas of ethanol
Name C2H6O
H
H
C
H
H
C
H
O H
CH3CH2OH
Molecular formula Structural formula Semi-structural formula
Ethanol 9A ORGANIC
REACTIONS:
SUBSTITUTION,
ADDITION AND
OXIDATION
LINK
Biodiesel
a type of biofuel
composed of the
esters of fatty
acids
Triglyceride
an organic
compound in
which the three
hydroxyl groups
of glycerol form
esters with
three fatty acid
molecules
If you’ve got your learner permit or probationary licence and have driven to fill the car up
at the petrol station, you will have noticed the fuel pump labelled ‘E10’. It is called E10 as
it contains a blend of 90% petrol and 10% ethanol. The addition of ethanol to petrol has
several advantages, including:
• the use of petrol derived from crude oil is reduced
• the fuel is oxygenated so that it burns more completely
• the amount of greenhouse gas emissions is reduced
• the source of the bioethanol makes it a more sustainable transport fuel.
Ethanol can be manufactured by the addition reaction of ethene with steam. You will
encounter this reaction again in Section 9A.
More commonly and naturally, ethanol is produced in plants and yeast that undergo
anaerobic fermentation. Typical crops grown globally for ethanol production include corn,
maize and wheat, but Australia has a long history of fermenting native plants. The Palawa
people of Tasmania have a history of using the sap of a cider gum to make the sweet
fermented drink wayalinah, and the Noongar people in south-western Australia have
fermented the fruit of the macrozamia plant (known as by-yu or kwineen) as a method of
detoxification and to enhance its nutritional value.
Biodiesel
Biodiesel is a mixture of organic compounds produced from vegetable oils, cooking oils
and animal fats. Because it is produced from plant and/or animal products, it is renewable
and often called ‘green diesel’. A transesterification reaction between plant and/or animal
triglycerides (fats, oils) and alcohol, typically methanol (CH3OH), results in a mixture
of methyl esters, or biodiesel. You will learn more about transesterification reactions in
Section 9B; however, an example reaction is shown in Figure 1A–8 below. Note that this
reaction also requires the presence of a strong base, such as sodium hydroxide (NaOH),
acting as a catalyst. Biodiesel production in this way requires less energy and has less
emissions than producing bioethanol.
First-generation
feedstock
a biofuel
produced
from edible
feedstocks
(starch, glucose)
from plants such
as corn and
wheat
H
O
O
H C 2B MEASURING ENERGy O R1
C OH
CH2
RELEASED O
9B ORGANIC
CH3
C
O R1
REACTIONS:
LINK
CONDENSATION
FROM CHEMICAL REACTIONS
AND
O
HYDROLYSIS
H C
C
O R2
Figure 1A–7 Cider gum
tree leaves and flowers
CH
OH
3CH3OH+ +
NaOH
catalyst
CH3
C
O R2
Enzyme
a protein
(left) and pollen cones
O
O
molecule that
of a Macrozamia ridelei
H C
acts as a catalyst
plant (right). These
C
O R3
CH2
OH
CH3
C
O R3
in a specific
Australian native plants
biochemical
H
reaction
are examples of those that
Methanol
Glycerol
Mixture of methyl
have been fermented.
esters (biodiesel)
Answer: The consistently lower temperature change observed in the calorimetry
Ester functional
R represents
Methyl group
NOTE
The main feedstock used in Australia for producing bioethanol is wheat. Facilities are
group, –COO
a hydrocarbon chain of
As first-
currently located in both New South Wales and Queensland, with plans for a large-scale
generation
experiment suggests that the error is likely to varying length.
facility to operate in regional Victoria in the future.
be systematic rather than random.
Figure 1A–8 Transesterification reaction between a triglyceride and methanol, producing
bioethanol
a mixture of fatty acids, or biodiesel
feedstocks
In wheat and other first-generation feedstocks, biological catalysts called enzymes speed
are also used
Systematic errors are characterised by consistent deviations in the same direction and
up the breakdown of cellulose and starch to sucrose. Yeast is then added to this solution.
NOTE
for food, there
The yeast contains another enzyme called invertase, which helps convert the sucrose into
is a tension
between
glucose. The glucose then binds with another enzyme in the yeast called zymase, which
growing these
magnitude. In this case, the lower recorded assists the final step of fermentation into ethanol (bioethanol) and carbon dioxide according
LINK CHAPTER 12
The other product in the transesterification reaction, glycerol, is commonly used in the
temperature change indicates a systematic bias
manufacture of pharmaceuticals. You will learn more about medicinal chemistry in Chapter 12.
crops for food
to the following equation.
If you look back at Figure 1A–5 on page 10, you will see that a large number of the
versus fuel.
This is called
that may be attributed to a flaw in the experimental set-up or procedure. It is important
glucose → ethanol + carbon dioxide
feedstocks used in biofuel production are vegetable oils, used for biodiesels.
the ‘food
versus fuel
C6H12O6(aq) → 2CH3CH2OH(aq) + 2CO2(g)
debate’.
to carefully examine factors such as insulation, There are currently three biodiesel plants operating in Australia. However, after peaking in
calorimeter calibration, heat loss and
the mid-2010s, they now operate at less than 40% capacity. With only around 0.2% blend
Notice that the ethanol produced from fermentation is in an aqueous (aq) state. This
rate with standard diesel, it is a fuel with very little focus in Australia. Globally, biodiesel
10B ANALYSIS
means that it is not pure and is hydrated by water molecules. These water molecules are
can be used in most existing diesel engines without them needing further modifications.
OF PURITY AND
CONCENTRATION
combustion efficiency to identify and rectify the source of this systematic error. By
LINK
removed by distillation, which will be covered in more detail in Section 10B.
Like bioethanol, these blends are also labelled at the pump, typically as B5 or B20,
indicating a 5% or 20% blend, respectively, of biodiesel with standard diesel.
addressing the underlying issue causing the consistent deviation, scientists can improve
the accuracy and reliability of the results obtained from the calorimetry experiment.
Section 2B questions
34
36
Section questions
Summative assessment is provided
1 In a calorimetry experiment, the combustion of a small piece of chocolate-chip cookie
at the end of each section, again
released 1260 J of energy, which was used to heat a quantity of water in a can. If the
temperature of this water increased by 3.25°C, determine the mass of water in the can.
with full answers provided in the
2 Explain the following observations in terms of specific heat capacity.
digital resources.
a Running water over a burn quickly helps reduce the burning feeling.
b Copper heats up much quicker than wood on a hot day.
Chapter reviews
Chapter 1 review
c A quantity of 10 J of heat energy causes a larger temperature shift in 1 g of water
vapour and 1 g of solid water compared with 1 g of liquid water.
Summaries: Students are
3 Solve the following problems using the values for specific heat capacity from Table 2B–1
Summary
Create your own set of summary notes for this chapter, on paper or in a digital document. A model
on page 53 where required.
encouraged to make their own set
7 In the process of photosynthesis, which of the following best outlines the main energy
summary is provided in the Teacher Resources and can be used to compare with yours.
a the heat energy required to increase the temperature of 2.66 g of solid water from
transformation taking place?
of summary notes to help them
–6.2°C to –1.1°C
Checklist
A light → heat
b the temperature change in a 3.32 g piece of copper wire that absorbs 423 J
assimilate the material. Model
B light → chemical
In the Interactive Textbook, the success criteria are linked from the review questions and will be
of energy
C chemical → heat
automatically ticked when answers are correct. Alternatively, print or photocopy this page and tick
summaries are provided in the
c the mass of basalt rock required to absorb 330 kJ of energy while only allowing a
the boxes when you have answered the corresponding questions correctly.
D carbon dioxide → glucose
Teacher Resources and are to be
temperature shift from 15.16°C to 18.77°C
Success criteria – I am now able to: 8 Both the complete and incomplete combustion of octane, C8H18,
Linked questions
d the specific heat capacity of liquid benzene, if 3 g of benzene increases from 13.13°C
given to students who need help.
1A.1 A occur in the presence of excess oxygen gas.
Define ‘fossil fuels’, ‘biofuels’, ‘renewable’ and
1☐, 11☐
to 17.22°C with 1.63 kilojoules of energy
‘non-renewable’
B produce carbon monoxide.
Creating summaries can also be
4 Calorimetry is the analytical technique that allows us to measure the heat released in a
1A.2 C are exothermic reactions.
Compare and contrast the different types of fossil fuels 11☐
chemical reaction.
turned into an assessment task, with
1A.3 D have positive enthalpies.
Compare and contrast the different types of biofuels 4☐
a What are the two common types of calorimetry and how do they differ structurally?
1A.4 Describe the process of producing bioethanol from glucose 12☐
the models serving as the answer.
9 Which of the following shows the correctly balanced chemical equation for photosynthesis?
Multiple-choice questions
b What are the key requirements for a calorimeter to work effectively?
1 Which of these statements best describes a fuel that is renewable?
1A.5 A 6CO2(g) + 12H2O(l) → 6O2(g) + C6H12O6(aq)
Recall that distillation is used in the production of bioethanol 12☐
c Give two experimental errors that could indicate a calorimeter is not set up properly
Checklists and Success criteria:
1A.6 B 6CO2(g) + 6H2O(l) → 6O2(g) + C6H12O6(aq)
and the cause.
A fossil fuels that are produced at the same rate at which they are consumed
State the equation for the fermentation of glucose 12☐
5 Give a possible cause for each of the following experimental observations in an
1A.7 C 6CO2(g) + 6H2O(l) → 6O2(g) + C6H6O12(aq)
B fossil fuels that are produced at a slower rate than they are consumed
Explain the advantages and disadvantages of fossil fuels
11☐, 12☐
The learning intentions from the
D C6H12O6(aq) + 6O2(g) → 6CO2(g) + 6H2O(l)
and biofuels
experiment using a calorimeter.
C biofuels that are produced at the same rate at which they are consumed
front of the chapter are listed again
a The temperature does not change during a reaction between butane and oxygen.
1B.1 Describe the process of photosynthesis 10 Ethane (C2H6) and oxygen react to form carbon dioxide and water. If 0.8 g of ethane reacts with
D biofuels that are produced at a slower rate than they are consumed
7☐
0.25 g of oxygen, which reactant is limiting?
b The temperature is not constant from the start to the end of the experiment.
in the form of success criteria linked
1B.2 State the equation for photosynthesis 2 What would be the most appropriate units to compare the enthalpy change of the combustion
9☐, 12☐
A oxygen
c The temperature increases sharply then starts to gradually decline.
of two different fuels, both containing a mixture of components?
1B.3 Describe the process of cellular respiration 3☐
to the multiple-choice and short-
B ethane
6 An electric heating coil was placed in a solution calorimeter containing 150 mL
A kJ
1B.4 State the equation for cellular respiration 12☐
C carbon dioxide
of water. A current of 2.50 amps with a potential difference of 13 volts was applied
answer questions that follow. The
B kJ g–1
1C.1 Compare and contrast exothermic and endothermic reactions 5☐, 11☐
to the heating coil for a period of 90 seconds. A temperature increase of 3.4°C was
D neither reactant is limiting
C kJ mol–1
checklists can be printed from
1C.2 Define ‘activation energy’ 6☐
recorded.
D g mol–1
Short-answer questions
the ITB, and students can tick off
After calibration, 10.3 g of sodium chloride was added to the calorimeter and the
1C.3 Define ‘enthalpy’ and ‘enthalpy change’ 3 What type of reaction does glucose undergo in cellular respiration?
2☐, 6☐
11 Concerns from society about the rising levels of greenhouse gas emissions are continuing
temperature was observed to decrease by 0.80°C.
1C.4 A oxidation
Draw and fully label energy profiles for exothermic and
13☐
their achievement manually. If they
to drive our focus on aspects of different types of fuels. Coal is one of Australia’s largest
a Calculate the calibration factor of the calorimeter.
endothermic reactions
B reduction
exports; however, the mining and burning of coal is a major contributor to our greenhouse
do the questions in the ITB, they
b Calculate the heat of solution of sodium chloride.
1C.5 Identify the limiting reagent in a given chemical reaction 10☐, 13☐
gas emissions.
C displacement
1C.6 Calculate the mass, concentration or volume of various reactants
are ticked automatically when the
D neutralisation
a List the two forms of greenhouse gases that are released from the plant remains
13☐
or products in a given chemical equation when a limiting reagent
during the formation of coal. (1 mark)
4 Which of the following biofuels is made from decomposing plant and animal materials?
questions are marked.
is present
b What conditions help to cause the release of these greenhouse gas emissions
1C.7 A biogas
Compare complete and incomplete combustion reactions of fuels from the coal beds? 13☐
(1 mark)
B biodiesel
1C.8 State that all combustion reactions are exothermic c Coal is an example of a fossil fuel. Explain why, by comparing this to biofuels. 8☐, 13☐
(2 marks)
C bioethanol
Unit revision exercises
1C.9 Determine the balanced thermochemical equation for complete
In the Latrobe Valley, east of Melbourne, an electricity generation company is
13☐
D biopetroleum
and incomplete combustion of organic molecules
planning to replace a thermal power station fired by brown coal with a thermal
5 In an endothermic reaction, the
Each Unit has a revision exercise in the print book, with both multiple-choice and short-answer questions.
plant fired by natural gas. Natural gas offers many potential benefits because it
A enthalpy change is negative.
results in the release of less greenhouse gases.
d Using your knowledge of natural gas, explain why less greenhouse gases
B products are more stable than the reactants.
are emitted. (2 marks)
C reaction releases energy in the form of heat.
e Would you say that natural gas is renewable? Explain. (1 mark)
D energy required to break bonds in the reactants is greater than the energy released to form
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al © Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
f Is the burning of natural gas an example of an exothermic or an endothermic
the bonds in the products.
Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
reaction? Explain. (2 marks)
6 From the table below, identify the correct explanations for both enthalpy change and activation
35
x
502 CHAPTER 13 SCIENTIFIC INVESTIGATIONS
Special content
• Chapter 13 Scientific
investigations includes
the different ways scientific
investigations may be
undertaken by students.
It features the modelling
of logbook development
for students’ own
practical investigations,
with detailed examples.
The digital textbook
includes information
on other investigation
methodologies.
Title
the research
question under
investigation;
includes
information about
what is being tested
Introduction
a detailed,
but succinct,
explanation of
the reason for
undertaking the
investigation;
includes key
chemical concepts,
aim and hypothesis
1
2
1
2
Logbook
Title
Determine the effect of a catalyst on the rate of a chemical reaction.
Does the addition of invertase result in an increased rate of glucose
production through its function as a catalyst on the hydrolysis of
sucrose?
Notes
The title should
include reference
to the variables
being changed
(independent
variable) and
measured (dependent
variable).
In the introduction
(to a poster) it can
also be appropriate
to present a labelled
diagram of the
concept/idea being
investigated.
Introduction
Enzymes are substances essential to help reactions proceed more
efficiently for these chemical reactions to actually occur. They are
made of key chemical elements, such as carbon, hydrogen, oxygen,
nitrogen and sulfur. Enzymes are specific to the substance that they
act on.
Enzymes are catalysts that increase the rate of chemical reactions
by lowering the activation energy for that reaction to occur by
providing an alternate reaction pathway. Invertase, the focus of
this investigation, is an enzyme present in plants and yeast that
catalyses the hydrolysis of sucrose into fructose and glucose.
Hydrolysis reactions involve the addition of water, as shown for this
reaction below:
sucrose + water → glucose + fructose
C12H22O11(aq) + H2O(l) → C6H12O6(aq) + C6H12O6(aq)
The progress of this reaction can therefore be measured by the
formation and concentration of glucose, determined using glucose
test strips. The more glucose present, the darker the colour
displayed on the test strip will be. This detects concentrations of
glucose between 0 mg mL–1 and 30 mg mL–1
.
Glucose produced in yeast and plants can be further broken down
with the aid of anaerobic bacteria to form ethanol (bioethanol) via
fermentation, according to the following chemical equation:
C6H12O6(aq) → 2C2H5OH(aq) + 2CO2(g)
Bioethanol as a fuel is a renewable source of energy that results in
less greenhouse gas emissions compared to fossil fuels.
Aim
the main purpose of
an investigation
1
2
Aim
To determine whether the presence of an enzyme increases the rate
of a chemical reaction.
To determine whether the presence of the enzyme invertase
increases the rate of hydrolysis of sucrose by measuring the
concentration of glucose produced using glucose test strips.
The aim includes
explicit reference to
the independent and
dependent variable.
This will be included
in your introduction
for the final scientific
poster presentation.
Interactive Textbook features
The digital version of the textbook is hosted on the Edjin
platform, offering easy navigation, excellent on-screen
display and multimedia assets, as well as auto-marking
of multiple-choice questions, and workspaces for other
questions with self-assessment and confidence-rating tools.
The different kinds of digital assets are listed below:
• Printable worksheets with extra questions and
activities (and content in some cases) are provided for
most chapters, marked by an icon in the margin, as
WORKSHEET 1A–1
DOC
COMPARING FUELS
shown on the right.
• Videos are provided for all chapters and are of two kinds: concept videos
demonstrate or illustrate important theory, while skills and example videos
VIDEO 3A–1
SKILLS: IMPORTANCE
OF OXIDATION
NUMBERS
work through the textbook’s skills and example boxes, providing extra
explanation and guidance. Some videos are provided in the print pages as QR codes for immediate access
and review.
• Answers (suggested responses) to questions are provided as printable documents in the teacher
resources and, if enabled by the teacher, below the question there are workspaces for short-answer
questions in the ITB.
• Prior knowledge can be tested with an auto-marked quiz with questions from the Year 9 and 10 titles in
the Cambridge Science for the Victorian Curriculum series.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
xi
Online Teaching Suite features (teacher resources)
The OTS provides Edjin’s learning management system, which allows teachers to set tasks, track progress
and scores, prepare reports on individuals and the class, and give students feedback. The assets include:
• Curriculum Grid and teaching programs
• Editable and printable Chapter tests with answers
• Checklists with linkage to the success criteria for the chapter question sets and tests
• A question bank and test generator, with answers
• Practice exams and assessment tasks, with answers
• Editable versions of Worksheets in the Interactive Textbook, and answers to them
• Downloadable, editable and printable practicals
• Editable and printable chapter summaries (model answers for the chapter summary activity)
• Teacher notes on selected content with additional theory explanation and suggestions for further
activities and resources
• Curated links to internet resources, such as videos and interactives.
Exam generator
The Online Teaching Suite includes a comprehensive bank of exam-style and actual VCAA exam questions
to create custom trial exams to target topics that students are having difficulty with. Features include:
• Filtering by question-type, topic and degree of difficulty
• Answers provided to teachers
• VCAA marking scheme
• Multiple-choice questions that will be auto-marked if completed online
• Tests that can be downloaded and used in class or for revision.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
xii
Overview: Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
knowledge, cultures and history
The VCE Chemistry Study Design includes aspects of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander knowledge,
cultures and history. This overview is a guide to coverage in this resource.
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples’ world views are highly integrated: each aspect of culture,
history and society connects with all other aspects. Each community has their own personalised system of
thinking, doing and knowing based on sharing culture and adapting to the environment around them.
In order to gain an understanding of any system, Indigenous or not, time and effort is needed to appreciate
it. That time is limited in this course; and it is wrong to try and generalise the Indigenous culture of
Australia, or even of Victoria. Instead, the coverage in the resource should be taken as a collection of
examples, and students should read up on or engage with their local Indigenous community to understand
their cultural aspects.
This textbook includes examples of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander knowledge, cultures and history
and in addition, for students, the Interactive Textbook includes an introductory guide prepared by First
Nations consultants advising on approaches to studying this material, with links to further reading.
For teachers, the teacher resources include a guide to approaches to teaching Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander knowledge, cultures and history in the VCE Chemistry course, with links to internet resources.
Guide to terms used in this resource
Language is very important in discussing Indigenous issues, especially given the past history of deliberately
offensive usage in Australia, where language was used to oppress and control.
Indigenous
First Australians and First Peoples of any
country
First Australians, First Nations or First Peoples
Indigenous people of Australia Respectful usage requires a capital ‘I’.
Aboriginal
an Aboriginal person is someone who is
of Aboriginal descent, identifies as being
Aboriginal and is accepted as such by the
Aboriginal community with which they
originally identified
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples
the Australian Indigenous population includes
Aboriginal People, Torres Strait Islander
People, and people who have both Aboriginal
and Torres Strait Islander heritage. The
term ‘Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander’
encompasses all three
These terms have become more common in recent years, with
‘Indigenous’ as the adjective.
One of the reasons that ‘First Nations’ and allied forms have become
more common is that the term ‘Aboriginal’ was sometimes used
disrespectfully, and still is in some circles.
While this is still used in official circles and is in the name or title of
many organisations and documents, it is tending to be replaced by
‘First Australians’ and similar terms, especially in everyday use. This
is partly because the abbreviation ‘ATSI’ is considered disrespectful
by Indigenous people, who regard it as lazy not to use a full title. The
abbreviation should not be used to refer to people.
Cambridge University Press & Assessment acknowledges the Australian Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
peoples of this nation. We acknowledge the traditional custodians of the lands on which our company is
located and where we conduct our business. We pay our respects to ancestors and Elders, past and present.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
xiii
Concept maps for Units 3&4
Pages xiii–xvi display the concept maps for topics in Chapters 1–13. Access the digital version of this
concept map in the ITB to zoom in on the details and click on hyperlinks to explore the interconnections of
the topics.
Chapter 1
Carbon-based fuels
4 CONCEPT MAP
Chapter 2 Measuring changes
in chemical reactions
40 CONCEPT MAP
Concept map
These processes
are examples
of exothermic
reactions
1A Types of fuels
Fossil fuels versus biofuels
Solar energy
Photosynthesis
Biofuel production
Crop harvesting
Industrial processing
Human consumption Energy
CO2
crops
H2O
Biofertiliser Electrical and/or
thermal energy
Digester
Organic
wastes
Anaerobic
digestion
Biogas
Natural gas
pipeline
Understanding processes that
plants and animals use to produce
or gain energy from fuels
1B Production of chemical energy in nature
Mitochondrion
Animal cell
Adenosine
triphosphate
Cellular
respiration
ATP
Carbon
dioxide
CO2
Energy for life processes
Plant cell
Water
H2O
Oxygen
O2
Glucose
C6H12O6
Photosynthesis Photosynthesis
Light energy
Chloroplast
1C Exothermic and endothermic reactions
Ea
Energy
Reactants
Energy
Ea
Products
Reactants
∆H
∆H
Products
Progress of reaction Progress of reaction
See the Interactive Textbook for an interactive version of this concept map
interlinked with all concept maps for the course.
Combustion
of fuels
as exothermic
reactions
Concept map
The natural greenhouse effect
Sun
Step 1:
The Sun’s radiation in
the form of sunlight
travels towards Earth.
Step 2:
Approximately half the
radiation is reflected or
absorbed by Earth’s
atmosphere and clouds.
2A Measuring greenhouse gases
Calculating the quantity of
greenhouse gases produced from
combustion reactions
Step 4:
Earth releases heat in
the form of infrared
radiation (IR). Step 5:
Some IR escapes
into space, allowing
Earth to cool.
Step 6:
The remaining IR is
trapped by gases in the
air, such as CO2, retaining
Step 3:
warmth and allowing
The remaining radiation
the planet to sustain life.
penetrates through to
be absorbed by the land
and oceans.
Thermometer
Stirrer
2B Measuring energy released
from chemical reactions
Using solution calorimetry to
determine the amount of
heat energy released or
absorbed from reactions
Thermally insulated cover
Thermally insulated seal
Reaction mixture
Insulated container
2C Measuring energy from food
Understanding how nutritional
content determines the quantity of
energy contained within food
See the Interactive Textbook for an interactive version of this concept map
interlinked with all concept maps for the course.
Chapter 3 Galvanic cells
CONCEPT MAP
Chapter 4 Fuel cells
130 CONCEPT MAP
77
Concept map
Concept map
3A Reduction and oxidation
Reactions that involve the loss
and gain of electrons
OIL
Oxidation is Loss
RIG
Reduction is Gain
4A Fuel cells
Features of fuel cells and
sustainability and environmental
considerations
e–
H2 Excess
H2
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+ +
+
+
+ +
+
+
O2
H2O
3B Writing redox equations
Writing and balancing redox
reactions in acidic and basic
conditions
3D Using the electrochemical series
Predictions of the redox reactions
that will occur and the voltage they
will produce
Anode
Zn(s)
Oxidation
Oxidising
agent
is reduced
3C Features of galvanic cells
Using spontaneous redox reactions
to convert chemical energy into
electrical energy
reacts with
Electrochemical cell (Galvanic cell)
is oxidised
Reducing
agent
V
e– e–
– +
Salt bridge
Cathode
Cu(s)
Reduction
Zn2+ Cu2+
Zn(s) → Zn2+(aq) + 2e– Cu2+(aq) + 2e–
→ Cu(s)
See the Interactive Textbook for an interactive version of this concept map
interlinked with all concept maps for the course.
Anode Cathode
Electrolyte
4B Faraday’s laws
Calculations of quantities using
these laws and stoichiometry
???V
S
a
l
t
b
r
i
d
g
e
Zn 25°C
1 M Zn2+(aq) 1 M Ni2+(aq)
Zn(s) → Zn2+(aq) + 2e– Ni2+(aq) + 2e– → Ni(s)
See the Interactive Textbook for an interactive version of this concept map
interlinked with all concept maps for the course.
Ni
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
xiv
Chapter 5
Rates of reaction
150 CONCEPT MAP
Chapter 6
Equilibrium
CONCEPT MAP
177
Concept map
5A What causes a
chemical reaction?
Exploring collision theory to
understand what needs to happen
for a successful reaction to occur
Correct orientation
Y
Successful collision
X
X
Y
X
Y
+
X
Y
X
Y
Reaction occurs,
products formed
X
Reactants
Y
Incorrect orientation
X X
X X Y+ Y
Y
+ Y
Y Y
X X
Reactants Unsuccessful
collision
Reaction unsuccessful,
reactants remain
5B Factors affecting reaction rate
Exploring how factors,
such as temperature and
concentration, affect the rate of
chemical reactions
Concept map
6A What is equilibrium?
Understanding the concept of
reversible chemical reactions
Forward reaction
A + B
Reverse reaction
C + D
Reversible reaction
A + B
6B The reaction quotient and
equilibrium constant
Calculations to determine the
position of a reversible reaction at
any given moment
aA + bB ⇌ cC + dD
[C]c[D]d
K =
[A]a[B]b
See the Interactive Textbook for an interactive version of this concept map
interlinked with all concept maps for the course.
C + D
A + B
C + D
6C Le Châtelier's principle
Understanding how a change in
reaction conditions, such as temperature
and pressure, impact the position
of equilibrium
Equilibrium
re-established
N2
Concentration (M)
O2
NO2
N2 added
Time
See the Interactive Textbook for an interactive version of this concept map
interlinked with all concept maps for the course.
Chapter 7 Electrolytic cells
CONCEPT MAP
209
Chapter 8 Structure and properties
of organic compounds
256 CONCEPT MAP
Concept map
7A Features of electrolytic cells
Features of these cells as secondary cells
+
Electrons travel
through metallic
conductors in circuit
–
e–
Anode
+
– Cathode
M+
Positive ions move
towards the negative
electrode
X–
Negative ions move towards
the positive electrode Electrolyte
Concept map
8A Structural diversity in organic compounds
Molecular, structural, semi-structural
and skeletal formulas
Structural formula
H
H C
H
H
C
H
H
C H
H
H
H C
H
H
H
H
H
C
C
C H
H C
H
H
H
H
H
H C H
C
H
H
C
H
H
C
H
H
H
HC
Primary amides
Aldehydes
Alkanes
Alkenes
Skeletal formula
Benzene
Ketones
Carboxylic acids
Esters
Haloalkanes
Primary amines
Alcohols
8B Molecules of carbon H
C
H
H
C
H H
C H H
H
H
H H
C
C
C
C
C
H
H
H
H
H
H
Parent
hydrocarbon
Ethyl group Ethyl
Ethyl
group
H
C
C
H
Methyl
group
group
H
C
H
CH3CH2CH2CH(CH2CH3)CH2CH2CH(CH3)CH3
H
H
Parent
Methyl
hydrocarbon group Parent
hydrocarbon
Methyl
group
8C Functional groups: haloalkanes,
amines and alcohols
8D Functional groups: aldehydes,
ketones, carboxylic acids and esters
H
H
CH
N
H
CH3NH2
methanamine
Amino functional group
H
H
H
H
H
H
H H C
C
H C
N
CH
C
N
H
H
H
H
H
H
CH3CH2NH2
CH3CH2CH2NH2
ethanamine
propan-1-amine
H
H
H
O
C
O
O H
H
C
H C
C
O
H C
O H
+ +
O C
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
RCOOH RCOOR’
+
HOR’ H2O+
Comparison of physical properties, like boiling point, melting point and viscosity, due to the organic compound’s structure and bonding
8E Physical properties of organic compounds
Boiling point of compounds with different types of intermolecular bonding
Boiling point (°c)
160
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
Strongest type of
intermolecular bonding
Dispersion forces only
Dipole–dipole forces
Hydrogen bonding
Pentane
Pent-1-ene
1-chloropropane
Methyl ethanoate
Butan-2-one
Butanal
Butan-1-amine
Butan-1-oI
Propanoic acid
Compound
See the Interactive Textbook for an interactive version of this concept map
interlinked with all concept maps for the course.
H
H
H+
7B Predicting the products of electrolysis Effects of the choice of components
and conditions
– +
Platinum
electrodes
Electrolyte
contains
Cu2+ ions
Ni2+ ions
Mg2+ ions
7C Commercial electrolytic cells
Design and innovation in commercial
electrolytic cells with a focus
on sustainability
PEM electrolysis
– +
O2
H2
H2O
Cathode
Anode
Membrane
7D Faraday’s laws of electrolysis
Calculations using these laws and stoichiometry
Four key steps to solving Faraday’s laws of electrolysis questions
m
1 Determine number of moles of metal (using n =
M ).
2 Determine number of moles of electrons (using the relevant half-equation).
3 Determine the charge, Q, using Q = n(e–) × F.
4 Determine current (amps) or time (seconds), using Q = It.
See the Interactive Textbook for an interactive version of this concept map
interlinked with all concept maps for the course.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
xv
Chapter 9 Reactions of organic
compounds
CONCEPT MAP
335
Chapter 10 Laboratory analysis
386 CONCEPT MAP
of organic compounds
Concept map
9A Organic reactions: substitution, addition and oxidation
Writing equations and
drawing reaction pathways
Pathway 1
Alkane
CI2 or Br2 NH3
Haloalkane
UV light
Primary amine
HCI or HBr or HI
Pathway 2
Alkene
9B Organic reactions: condensation and hydrolysis
Writing equations and
drawing reaction pathways
+
OH
H2O H+
Hydrolysis reaction
Reactant Product A Product B
Calculating % yield and atom economy with
a view on Green Chemistry Principles
9C Designing sustainable organic reactions
1. Waste
prevention
2. Atom
economy
3. Less
hazardous
chemical
syntheses
4. Design
safer
chemicals
5. Safer
solvents and
auxiliaries
6. Design
for energy
efficiency
7. Use
renewable
feedstocks
8. Reduce
derivatives 9. Catalysis
10. Design for
degradation
11. Real-
time analysis
for pollution
prevention
12. Inherently
safer chemistry
for accident
prevention
See the Interactive Textbook for an interactive version of this concept map
interlinked with all concept maps for the course.
Concept map
10A Analysis of functional groups
Qualitative tests to determine the presence
of carbon-carbon double bonds and
hydroxyl and carboxyl functional groups
10B Analysis of purity and concentration
Experimental techniques, including distillation,
melting point determination and volumetric
analysis, to determine purity and concentration
Thermometer
Round bottom flask
Hotplate
Cooling
water out
Condenser
Cooling
water in
Distillate
See the Interactive Textbook for an interactive version of this concept map
interlinked with all concept maps for the course.
Chapter 11 Instrumental analysis of
organic compounds
CONCEPT MAP 423
Chapter 12 Medicinal chemistry
CONCEPT MAP
461
Base peak, relative
intensity = 100
Concept map
11A Mass spectrometry
Technique for determining the mass
and identity of organic compounds
11B Infrared spectroscopy
Technique for identifying functional
groups in organic compounds
11C Nuclear magnetic resonance
spectroscopy
Technique for determining the
identity and structure of organic
compounds
11D Chromatography
Technique for separating organic
compounds in mixtures, analysing
purity and determining
concentration
100
80
Relative intensity
60
40
20
0
10 15 20 25 30 35
m/z
40 45
100
80
Transmittance (%)
60
40
20
0
4000 3000 2000 1500 1000 500
Wavenumber (cm–1)
Chemical shift
Relative peak
(ppm)
area
1.23 3
2.61 1
3.69 2
11 10 9 8
7 6
5 4 3 2 1 0
ppm
3000000
2500000
Peak area
2000000
1500000
1000000
500000
0
0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20
Sample concentrations (mg L–1)
See the Interactive Textbook for an interactive version of this concept map
interlinked with all concept maps for the course.
Molecular
ion peak,
m/z = 46.0
Concept map
O
HO
Cortisol
12A Organic compounds as medicines
Developing medicine using
compounds found in nature and
identifying key functional groups
that make medicine effective
CH2OH
CH2OH
O
CH2OH
H
C O
OH HO
C O C O
C
HO
O
O
Corticosterone
Aldosterone
12B Enzymes
Biological catalysts that speed up
chemical reactions and can be used
as therapeutic targets
Normal enzyme reaction
Products
Substrate
Enzyme Enzyme
Enzyme–substrate complex
Competitive inhibition
STOP
Inhibitor
Enzyme Substrate Enzyme–inhibitor
complex
Inhibitor binds to active site,
preventing the substrate from
binding
See the Interactive Textbook for an interactive version of this concept map
interlinked with all concept maps for the course.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
xvi
Chapter 13 Scientific
investigations
CONCEPT MAP
499
Concept map
13A Investigative planning and design
13B Scientific evidence
Structuring the logbook
– investigative design
Structuring the logbook
– scientific evidence
13C Scientific communication
See the Interactive Textbook for an interactive version of this
concept map interlinked with all concept maps for the course.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
xvii
Acknowledgements
The publisher and authors would like to thank Dr Sarah Mann and Janice Stubbings
for their reviews and contributions to this resource.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
2
UNIT
3
HOW CAN DESIGN AND INNOVATION HELP TO
OPTIMISE CHEMICAL PROCESSES?
CHAPTER
1
CARBON-BASED FUELS
Introduction
This chapter begins your exploration of energy and some of the different types of
fuel used to generate energy for society. You will compare various types of fossil
fuels and biofuels, including how they are sourced, produced and used in society,
while understanding the advantages and disadvantages of each. You will also look
at the processes by which plants and animals convert the energy contained within
light and food into usable forms of chemical energy. You will learn about reactions that
either release or absorb heat energy, as well as how to represent these diagrammatically.
Finally, you will look at calculating the quantity of energy released from the combustion
of fuels and explore the concepts of limiting and excess reagents for these types of reactions.
Curriculum
Area of Study 1 Outcome 1
What are the current and future options for supplying energy?
Study Design: INTRODUCTION
VIDEO
CARBON-BASED
FUELS
Learning intentions – at the end of the
chapter I will be able to:
• The definition of a fuel, including the
distinction between fossil fuels (coal,
natural gas, petrol) and biofuels (biogas,
bioethanol, biodiesel) with reference to
their renewability (ability of a resource to
be replaced by natural processes within a
relatively short period of time)
• Production of bioethanol by the
fermentation of glucose, C6H12O6(aq) →
2C2H5OH(l) + 2CO2(g), and subsequent
distillation to produce a more sustainable
transport fuel
1A Types of fuels
1A.1  Define ‘fossil fuels’, ‘biofuels’,
‘renewable’ and ‘non-renewable’
1A.2  Compare and contrast the different types
of fossil fuels
1A.3  Compare and contrast the different types
of biofuels
1A.4  Describe the process of producing
bioethanol from glucose
1A.5  Recall that distillation is used in the
production of bioethanol
1A.6  State the equation for the fermentation
of glucose
1A.7  Explain the advantages and
disadvantages of fossil fuels and biofuels
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
3
Study Design: Learning intentions – at the end of the
chapter I will be able to:
•
•
Photosynthesis as the process that
converts light energy into chemical energy
and as a source of glucose and oxygen for
respiration in living things:
6CO2(g) + 6H2O(l) → C6H12O6(aq) + 6O2(g)
Oxidation of glucose as the primary
carbohydrate energy source, including
the balanced equation for cellular
respiration:
C6H12O6(aq) + 6O2(g) → 6CO2(g) + 6H2O(l)
1B Production of chemical energy
in nature
1B.1 1B.2 1B.3  Describe the process of photosynthesis
 State the equation for photosynthesis
 Describe the process of cellular
respiration
1B.4  State the equation for cellular respiration
•
•
•
Comparison of exothermic and
endothermic reactions, with reference
to bond making and bond breaking,
including enthalpy changes (ΔH)
measured in kJ, molar enthalpy changes
measured in kJ mol–1 and enthalpy
changes for mixtures measured in kJ g–1
,
and their representations in energy profile
diagrams
Determination of limiting reactants or
reagents in chemical reactions
Combustion (complete and incomplete)
reactions of fuels as exothermic reactions;
the writing of balanced thermochemical
equations, including states, for the
complete and incomplete combustion
of organic molecules using experimental
data and data tables
1C Exothermic and endothermic reactions
1C.1  Compare and contrast exothermic and
endothermic reactions
1C.2  Define ‘activation energy’
1C.3 1C.4  Define ‘enthalpy’ and ‘enthalpy change’
 Draw and fully label energy profiles for
exothermic and endothermic reactions
1C.5  Identify the limiting reagent in a given
chemical reaction
1C.6  Calculate the mass, concentration or
volume of various reactants or products
in a given chemical equation when a
limiting reagent is present
1C.7  Compare complete and incomplete
combustion reactions of fuels
1C.8  State that all combustion reactions
are exothermic
1C.9  Determine the balanced thermochemical
equation for complete and incomplete
combustion of organic molecules
VCE Chemistry Study Design extracts © VCAA; reproduced by permission.
Glossary
Activation energy
Aerobic
Anabolic
Anaerobic
Biodiesel
Bioethanol
Biofuel
Biogas
Biomass
Catabolic
Cellular respiration
Coal
Complete combustion
Crude oil
Endothermic
Enthalpy
Enthalpy change
Enzyme
Exothermic
Fermentation
First-generation feedstock
Fossil fuel
Fracking
Fractional distillation
Fuel
Incomplete combustion
Inorganic
Natural gas
Non-renewable
Organic
Oxidation number
Oxidised
Photosynthesis
Renewable
Triglyceride
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
4 CONCEPT MAP
Concept map
Biofuel production
Crop harvesting
Industrial processing
Human consumption Energy
crops
1A Types of fuels
Fossil fuels versus biofuels
Solar energy
Photosynthesis
CO2
H2O
Biofertiliser Electrical and/or
thermal energy
Biogas
Natural gas
pipeline
Digester
Adenosine
triphosphate
ATP
Energy for life processes
These processes
are examples
of exothermic
reactions
Organic
wastes
Anaerobic
digestion
Understanding processes that
plants and animals use to produce
or gain energy from fuels
Animal cell
Plant cell
1B Production of chemical energy in nature
Mitochondrion
Cellular
respiration
Carbon
dioxide
CO2
Water
H2O
Oxygen
O2
Glucose
C6H12O6
Photosynthesis Photosynthesis
Light energy
Chloroplast
1C Exothermic and endothermic reactions
Ea
Energy
Ea
Products
Reactants
∆H
∆H
Products
Progress of reaction Progress of reaction
See the Interactive Textbook for an interactive version of this concept map
interlinked with all concept maps for the course.
Combustion
of fuels
as exothermic
reactions
Energy
Reactants
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
1A TyPES OF FUELS
5
1A Types of fuels
Study Design:
•
The definition of a fuel,
including the distinction
between fossil fuels (coal,
natural gas, petrol) and
biofuels (biogas, bioethanol,
biodiesel) with reference to
their renewability (ability of a
resource to be replaced by
natural processes within a
relatively short period of time)
•
Production of bioethanol by
the fermentation of glucose,
C6H12O6(aq) → 2C2H5OH(l)
+ 2CO2(g), and subsequent
distillation to produce a more
sustainable transport fuel
Glossary:
Anaerobic
Biodiesel
Bioethanol
Biofuel
Biogas
Biomass
Coal
Crude oil
Enzyme
Fermentation
First-generation
feedstock
Fossil fuel
Fracking
Fractional distillation
Fuel
Inorganic
Natural gas
Non-renewable
Organic
Photosynthesis
Renewable
Triglyceride
ENGAGE
Australia’s first petrol-driven car
When Harley Tarrant was young, his
father owned the Clunes Gazette, the
St Kilda Chronicle and the Prahran
Chronicle. As such, Harley was
surrounded by information from overseas
publications, and from these articles he
learned about, and became obsessed
with, cars.
Later, when working on the Nullarbor
Plain as a surveyor, he determined
that steam and electric vehicles would
not be suitable to tackle the harsh
Australian outback. In 1897, he decided
to build a kerosene engine with bicycle-
maker, Howard Lewis. Due to the high
Figure 1A–1 The vehicle shown in this photo is
the first two-seater, two-cylinder petrol engine
automobile built and sold in Australia, by
Harley Tarrant and Howard Lewis in 1901.
temperature at which kerosene vaporises,
it was not suitable as a fuel for a car engine, but it was ideal for pumping water. His engine
sold extremely well across Australia, providing him funding to continue working on a
suitable fuel and engine for an automobile.
Following this, Tarrant and Lewis set out to build their own petrol-driven car, which
used an imported Benz engine. After successfully developing a two-cylinder petrol
motor car in 1901, they refined it further with their own locally made engine. At the
time, they decided to sacrifice speed for a car that would thrive in Australian conditions.
Since then, and especially recently, the use of different fuels has continued to evolve
from fossil fuels to biofuels, and now the push to fully electric vehicles. Fossil fuels and
biofuels, with a focus on their renewability, are discussed further in this section.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
6 CHAPTER 1 CARBON-BASED FUELS
Fuel
any substance
that stores
chemical energy
1C EXOTHERMIC
AND
ENDOTHERMIC
REACTIONS
LINK
Organic
a chemical
that contains
both carbon
and hydrogen
(hydrocarbons)
or substances
obtained from
plants and
animals
Inorganic
a chemical that
does not contain
both carbon
and hydrogen
or contains
substances
obtained from
minerals
UNIT 1
1B PRODUCTION
OF CHEMICAL
ENERGY IN
NATURE
LINK
LINK
EXPLAIN
What are fuels and why do we need them?
Likely, when you hear the word ‘fuel’, you think about petrol, diesel or coal used to power
planes, trains and automobiles. However, as you will see later in this chapter, food, such as
sugar, is also used as a fuel for our bodies.
Fuels are both organic and inorganic substances capable of storing chemical energy. In this
section, we will look at only organic fuels. As you will see in Section 1C, when a fuel is
burned, the stored chemical energy is released as heat (thermal) energy, which can then be
further used to power objects.
You should be familiar with the units of energy from earlier years in science. The
International System of Units (SI) unit for energy is the joule, J.
Fossil fuels
Fossil fuels are mostly hydrocarbons, with some other minor impurities, as you learned
about in Unit 1 and will learn more about in Unit 4. They are called ‘fossil’ fuels, as they
are formed through the fossilised remains and subsequent decay of plants, animals and
microorganisms, which lived millions of years ago. The hydrocarbon remains are extracted
through mining and the drilling of wells both on land and at sea. These remains still contain
some of the chemical energy that the plants, and the plants consumed by animals at the
time, originally stored from transforming light energy from the Sun when carrying out
photosynthesis. Photosynthesis as a chemical process will be covered further in Section 1B.
Fossil fuels are non-renewable, meaning their availability is limited and they are being
consumed at a rate faster than they are being produced. As these fossil fuels are formed over
millions of years, once they are depleted, they will not be replaced any time soon.
Fossil fuels can be separated into three main categories: coal, natural gas and petroleum.
Coal
Natural gas Petroleum
Fossil fuel
a source of
fuel made from
decomposing
plants and
animals over
hundreds of
millions of years.
It consists mainly
of carbon and
hydrogen atoms
Photosynthesis
a chemical
reaction in which
light energy is
used to convert
the inorganic
compounds
carbon dioxide,
CO2, and water,
H2O, into
the organic
compound
glucose; photo
= light, synthesis
= build or put
together
Figure 1A–2 The three main categories of fossil fuels, all of which contain
carbon and hydrogen, with other minor impurities
Non-renewable
limited or not
capable of being
replenished at
a rate equal to
consumption
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
1A TyPES OF FUELS
7
Coal
Coal is a layer of sedimentary rock formed underground, containing mostly plant remains,
that are then buried by further sediments. It is formed under low oxygen conditions at
high temperatures and pressures over millions of years. Coal formations are called ‘coal
beds’ and they exist globally. The deeper the coal bed, the higher its rank, where the
ranking is based on how much it has changed over time. Deeper underground, the plant
matter experiences higher temperatures and pressures, and so more of the plant remains
are transformed into carbon, while water (H2O), carbon dioxide (CO2) and methane
(CH4) escape. The methane that is produced is trapped as coal seam gas. The higher the
percentage of carbon, the better the coal fuel source.
Flooding led to the
burial of plant matter
beneath soil
Dead plant matter was
converted to coal under high
pressures and temperatures
Coal
sedimentary rock
containing plant
remains formed
over millions
of years
Lignite
(brown coal) Black coal
Millions of years
Figure 1A–3 The formation and existence of different coal layers
Coal is the most abundant of the fossil fuels and is the largest fuel source used for
generating electricity in the world. Coal is Australia’s largest energy resource. It is mined in
every state in Australia, with the largest black coal resources located in New South Wales
and Queensland. As Figure 1A–3 shows, black coal is buried deeper than other layers of
coal, but because of the heat efficiency it provides, it is much more economical for mining.
Approximately 70% of the coal mined in Australia is exported, mostly to eastern Asian
regions. In 2019, pre-COVID, coal exploration expenditure was $229 million, which was
an increase of 32% from 2018. In comparison, the combustion of brown coal produces
approximately 85% of Australia’s electricity.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
8 CHAPTER 1 CARBON-BASED FUELS
UNIT 1
LINK
8B MOLECULES
OF CARBON LINK
8B MOLECULES
OF CARBON
LINK
Natural gas
a fossil fuel
formed when
layers of
decomposing
plant and
animal remains
experience high
temperatures
and pressures
Fracking
a process in
which fluid
is injected at
high pressure,
fracturing
sedimentary
rocks, releasing
gas or oil
Natural gas
Natural gas is mostly methane (CH4), with traces of other small hydrocarbons, such as
ethane (C2H6), propane (C3H8) and butane (C4H10). Other substances including water,
carbon dioxide, sulfur and nitrogen can also be present in the gas reservoirs.
You will recall that in the formation of coal, the increased pressure and temperature
resulted in the physical and chemical change of the sedimentary rock, releasing methane,
carbon dioxide and water.
Likewise, this pressure causes the natural gas found in rock formations to adsorb to the
surface of the coal. When drilling wells fracture coal deposits, natural gas flows to the
surface, as shown in Figure 1A–4. This process is called fracking. A fracking fluid is injected
into the well to increase the permeability of the sediment, allowing an easier flow of gas to
the surface. The fracking fluid contains sand, water and other chemicals. A chemical once
used in fracking fluid was benzene, which you will learn about in Section 8B. However, this
has been banned in Australia because it is carcinogenic, and there is a potential risk of it
escaping and contaminating water supplies. Sand is convenient as a component of this fluid
because it is often present at the site of drilling. However, water is not, and so this has to
be transported to the drilling sites, which is environmentally unfriendly and economically
costly.
One of the environmental concerns associated with fracking is that it releases methane, a
greenhouse gas, into the atmosphere. It is predicted that approximately 4–8% leaks to the
atmosphere from the well head, pipelines and storage facilities.
Hydraulic fracturing
Fracturing fluid Fluid with gas
500 m
Water aquifer
Separating layer
Sandstone
Injected hole
1000 m
Gas-bearing
formation
Figure 1A–4 The fracking process
releases natural gas trapped above
crude oil layers to the surface.
Hydraulic fractures
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
1A TyPES OF FUELS
9
Petroleum
In Unit 1, you learned about crude oil as being a mixture of predominantly alkanes, which
are organic hydrocarbon molecules. Like coal and natural gas, crude oil is formed from
plant and animal remains that decay over millions of years. However, crude oil is not as
widespread or as easy to access as coal and natural gas.
Crude oil is essentially petrol (petroleum). However, because the crude oil mixture contains
many hydrocarbons with varying sizes (based on their number of carbon atoms), it is not
useful to mine and use directly once drilled and brought to the surface. The crude oil
first needs to be separated into its various hydrocarbon fractions in a process called
fractional distillation.
Fractional distillation works on the fundamental basis that different-sized hydrocarbons
can be separated from each other because of their different boiling points, something you
learned in Unit 1 and will again cover in Section 10B. Countries in the Middle East are the
main sources and exporters of crude oil, including petrol, internationally. Australia, being
one of their trade partners, imports 90% of all the crude oil it uses. Australia does have a few
small crude oil reserves off the coast of northern Western Australia, South Australia and
Bass Strait; however, these are likely to be depleted by 2100.
LINK UNIT 1
Crude oil
a naturally
occurring
mixture of liquid
hydrocarbons
that can be used
as a fuel source
Fractional
distillation
separation
of a mixture
of liquids
into separate
fractions based
on their boiling
points
LINK UNIT 1
LINK
Check-in questions – Set 1
10B ANALYSIS
OF PURITY AND
CONCENTRATION
1 Recall the three different types of fossil fuels.
2 Which fossil fuels (from your answer to Question 1) are associated with the following
processes:
a fractional distillation
b fracking
3 Fossil fuels are described as being non-renewable. What does this mean?
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
10 CHAPTER 1 CARBON-BASED FUELS
Biofuel
a renewable
energy source
produced from
biological matter
called biomass
Renewable
a resource
that can be
replenished
at an equal or
higher rate than
it is consumed
Biomass
renewable
organic matter
that comes from
plants, animals
and other living
organisms
Biofuels
While fossil fuels take millions of years to produce, and are being used up at a faster rate
than which they are being replenished, biofuels are the opposite. Biofuels are classified
as renewable because they can be produced at the same rate at which they are consumed.
As the name suggests, they are produced from living (hence, bio) matter, called biomass.
There are three types of biofuels covered in this chapter: biogas, bioethanol and biodiesel.
Figure 1A–5 shows the proportion of feedstocks in total biofuel production. As you will see
in the following pages, different feedstocks can be used for different types of biofuel.
200
150
Billion litres per year
100
50
0
2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026 2027
Year
Sugars Maize Soybean oil Rapeseed oil Palm oil Other crops
Used cooking oil Animal fats Other wastes and residues
Figure 1A–5 Predicted total biofuel production by feedstock, 2021–2027. This is a work derived
by Cambridge University Press & Assessment from International Energy Agency (IEA) material, and
Cambridge University Press & Assessment is solely liable and responsible for this derived work. The
derived work is not endorsed by the IEA in any manner.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
1A TyPES OF FUELS
11
Biogas
Biogas is formed from the breakdown of organic biological waste, such as plant matter,
by anaerobic bacteria. Anaerobic bacteria are those that thrive in the absence of oxygen.
The bacteria break down complex carbohydrates, such as cellulose and starch, as well as
proteins, into simpler molecules. The contents and percentage of these simpler molecules
will depend on the starting organic material that is being decomposed. Approximate
percentages are shown in Table 1A–1.
Table 1A–1 Approximate percentages of contents within biogas
Molecule Percentage (%)
Biogas
a type of biofuel
formed from the
breakdown of
organic waste
by anaerobic
bacteria
Anaerobic
an organism
or process that
does not require
oxygen
Methane (CH4) 50–75
Carbon dioxide (CO2) 25–50
Nitrogen (N2) 0–10
Hydrogen sulfide (H2S) 0–3
Hydrogen (H2) 0–1
Oxygen (O2) 0–1
As you can see from the biogas cycle shown in Figure 1A–6, the original solar energy is
captured by crops and transformed into chemical energy by photosynthesis, which will
be explored in Section 1B. For large-scale production, the organic waste produced from
harvesting crops, food waste and animal by-products is placed in a large tank called a
digester. The digester is filled with anaerobic bacteria. Waste from this process can be used
as a good biofertiliser and the biogas produced is useful for heating and electricity in homes
and farms. This cycle further highlights the renewability and low impact of greenhouse
gas emissions for this process.
Solar energy
Photosynthesis
LINK
1B PRODUCTION
OF CHEMICAL
ENERGY IN
NATURE
Biofuel production
Crop harvesting
Industrial processing
Human consumption Energy
crops
CO2
H2O
Biofertiliser Electrical and/or
thermal energy
Digester
Natural gas
pipeline
Organic
wastes
Anaerobic
digestion
Biogas
Figure 1A–6 The biogas cycle
The Australian biogas industry is still emerging. In 2017, there were 272 biogas plants,
most of which use raw materials that would otherwise rot in landfill. In 2021, the first
large-scale biogas plant was announced for Nowra, in NSW. According to the Australian
Renewable Energy Agency (ARENA), the estimated biogas potential would place Australia
on par with Germany, a leading country in the production of biogas.
You will learn more about biogas when discussing green chemistry in fuel cells in Section 4A. LINK 4A FUEL CELLS
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
12 CHAPTER 1 CARBON-BASED FUELS
Fermentation
the process by
which glucose
is broken down
in the absence
of oxygen to
produce energy
(ATP); also
called anaerobic
cellular
respiration
Bioethanol
a type of biofuel
produced by
fermentation in
plants and yeast
Bioethanol
Ethanol is a two-carbon hydrocarbon containing a hydroxyl (–OH) functional group. Its
molecular formula, structural formula and semi-structural formula are shown in Table 1A–2.
Table 1A–2 The molecular, structural and semi-structural formulas of ethanol
Name Molecular formula Structural formula Semi-structural formula
Ethanol C2H6O
H
H
C
H
H
C
H
CH3CH2OH
O H
9A ORGANIC
REACTIONS:
SUBSTITUTION,
ADDITION AND
OXIDATION
LINK
Ethanol can be manufactured by the addition reaction of ethene with steam. You will
encounter this reaction again in Section 9A.
More commonly and naturally, ethanol is produced in plants and yeast that undergo
anaerobic fermentation. Typical crops grown globally for ethanol production include corn,
maize and wheat, but Australia has a long history of fermenting native plants. The Palawa
people of Tasmania have a history of using the sap of a cider gum to make the sweet
fermented drink wayalinah, and the Noongar people in south-western Australia have
fermented the fruit of the macrozamia plant (known as by-yu or kwineen) as a method of
detoxification and to enhance its nutritional value.
First-generation
feedstock
a biofuel
produced
from edible
feedstocks
(starch, glucose)
from plants such
as corn and
wheat
Enzyme
a protein
molecule that
acts as a catalyst
in a specific
biochemical
reaction
NOTE
As first-
generation
bioethanol
feedstocks
are also used
for food, there
is a tension
between
growing these
crops for food
versus fuel.
This is called
the ‘food
versus fuel
debate’.
10B ANALYSIS
OF PURITY AND
CONCENTRATION
LINK
Figure 1A–7 Cider gum
tree leaves and flowers
(left) and pollen cones
of a Macrozamia ridelei
plant (right). These
Australian native plants
are examples of those that
have been fermented.
The main feedstock used in Australia for producing bioethanol is wheat. Facilities are
currently located in both New South Wales and Queensland, with plans for a large-scale
facility to operate in regional Victoria in the future.
In wheat and other first-generation feedstocks, biological catalysts called enzymes speed
up the breakdown of cellulose and starch to sucrose. Yeast is then added to this solution.
The yeast contains another enzyme called invertase, which helps convert the sucrose into
glucose. The glucose then binds with another enzyme in the yeast called zymase, which
assists the final step of fermentation into ethanol (bioethanol) and carbon dioxide according
to the following equation.
glucose → ethanol + carbon dioxide
C6H12O6(aq) → 2CH3CH2OH(aq) + 2CO2(g)
Notice that the ethanol produced from fermentation is in an aqueous (aq) state. This
means that it is not pure and is hydrated by water molecules. These water molecules are
removed by distillation, which will be covered in more detail in Section 10B.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
1A TyPES OF FUELS
13
If you’ve got your learner permit or probationary licence and have driven to fill the car up
at the petrol station, you will have noticed the fuel pump labelled ‘E10’. It is called E10 as
it contains a blend of 90% petrol and 10% ethanol. The addition of ethanol to petrol has
several advantages, including:
• the use of petrol derived from crude oil is reduced
• the fuel is oxygenated so that it burns more completely
• the amount of greenhouse gas emissions is reduced
• the source of the bioethanol makes it a more sustainable transport fuel.
Biodiesel
Biodiesel is a mixture of organic compounds produced from vegetable oils, cooking oils
and animal fats. Because it is produced from plant and/or animal products, it is renewable
and often called ‘green diesel’. A transesterification reaction between plant and/or animal
triglycerides (fats, oils) and alcohol, typically methanol (CH3OH), results in a mixture
of methyl esters, or biodiesel. You will learn more about transesterification reactions in
Section 9B; however, an example reaction is shown in Figure 1A–8 below. Note that this
reaction also requires the presence of a strong base, such as sodium hydroxide (NaOH),
acting as a catalyst. Biodiesel production in this way requires less energy and has less
emissions than producing bioethanol.
Biodiesel
a type of biofuel
composed of the
esters of fatty
acids
Triglyceride
an organic
compound in
which the three
hydroxyl groups
of glycerol form
esters with
three fatty acid
molecules
H
H C H C
O
O R1
C OH
CH2
O
C
O R2
O
C
O R3
CH3
O
C
O R1
LINK
9B ORGANIC
REACTIONS:
CONDENSATION
AND
HYDROLYSIS
CH
OH
3CH3OH+ +
NaOH
catalyst
CH3
O
C
O R2
H C
H
CH2
OH
CH3
O
C
O R3
Ester functional
group, –COO
Methanol
Glycerol
Methyl group
Mixture of methyl
esters (biodiesel)
R represents
a hydrocarbon chain of
varying length.
Figure 1A–8 Transesterification reaction between a triglyceride and methanol, producing
a mixture of fatty acids, or biodiesel
NOTE
LINK CHAPTER 12
The other product in the transesterification reaction, glycerol, is commonly used in the
manufacture of pharmaceuticals. You will learn more about medicinal chemistry in Chapter 12.
If you look back at Figure 1A–5 on page 10, you will see that a large number of the
feedstocks used in biofuel production are vegetable oils, used for biodiesels.
There are currently three biodiesel plants operating in Australia. However, after peaking in
the mid-2010s, they now operate at less than 40% capacity. With only around 0.2% blend
rate with standard diesel, it is a fuel with very little focus in Australia. Globally, biodiesel
can be used in most existing diesel engines without them needing further modifications.
Like bioethanol, these blends are also labelled at the pump, typically as B5 or B20,
indicating a 5% or 20% blend, respectively, of biodiesel with standard diesel.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
14 CHAPTER 1 CARBON-BASED FUELS
WORKSHEET
1A–1
COMPARING
FUELS
VIDEO 1A–1
RENEWABLE
AND NON-
RENEWABLE
FUELS
DOC
Comparing fossil fuels and biofuels
In this chapter so far, you have learned about six different types of fuels. Three of these
were fossil fuels and three were biofuels. Table 1A–3 highlights the key comparisons of
these with a focus on their renewability and societal impacts.
Table 1A–3 Advantages and disadvantages of the different types of fossil fuels and biofuels
Fuel type Coal Advantages Disadvantages
Fossil fuels
(non-renewable)
• Mined easily
•
Large reserves remaining
•
Cheap
•
Can be converted to liquid and
gas fuel, which is more portable
if oil runs out
•
•
Traces of sulfur and nitrogen react with
atmospheric O2 to form SO2 and NO2,
which contribute to acid rain.
Finite supply so will eventually run out
Natural gas • Moderate cost for consumers
•
Easily converted to methanol
•
Produces least pollution
•
•
•
Limited reserves remaining
Economically expensive to harness
and transport
Environmental concerns over fracking
Petrol • Easily transported
•
Less pollution than coal
•
Many applications
•
•
•
Limited reserves remaining globally,
and availability will decline within
decades
Expensive
Mining is destroying ecosystems
(both on and offshore)
Biofuels
(renewable)
Biogas • Derived from plants, animals
and humans
•
Utilisation of waste for heating,
electricity and fertilisers, rather
than letting it rot in landfills
•
Produces a circular economy
•
Good alternative for electricity
and heating in rural areas or
developing countries
•
•
•
Very few technological advancements,
so additional research and government
funding required to make production
efficient
Anaerobic digestion occurs optimally
at 37°C, so in colder climates heat
energy is required to generate biogas
continually.
Odour is emitted from digesters used in
this process, so a need to build these
in locations away from residences
Bioethanol • Reduces greenhouse gas
emissions, as crops used for
fuel production absorb the CO2
they emit when burned
•
Combining with oil extends the
longevity of limited crude oil
supplies
•
•
Production requires large volumes of
water.
crops
The food vs fuel debate of growing
Biodiesel • New land not required for
production
•
Reduces hydrocarbon
emissions and the lifecycle of
greenhouse gases
•
Reduces smog thereby
reducing atmospheric pollution
•
•
Farmland used for growing fuel instead
of food
Large volumes of water (or availability)
and fertilisers required
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
1A TyPES OF FUELS
15
While biofuels might seem like a better alternative to fossil fuels, their increasing use in
the immediate future raises a number of other important implications that need to be
considered and managed, including:
• how much land degradation and forest destruction occurs to grow crops
• the percentage of crops grown for fuel versus that grown for food to meet the needs of
increasing population sizes.
Research is underway to look at the potential for either algae or agave crops to be used as a
feedstock for biodiesel production. The latter thrives in dry, arid desert environments with
little water and produces a high oil yield. Therefore, land required for growing food would
not be compromised.
1A SKILLS
VIDEO 1A–2
SKILLS:
COMPARISON-
BASED
QUESTIONS
Comparison-based questions
In this section, you were presented with six different types of fuels. You learned
about how and where each was sourced from, the chemical processes used in their
production and their respective advantages and disadvantages. As such, it is predictable
that assessment questions will require you to compare various aspects of different
combinations of these fuels. In comparison or contrast questions, you are required to
explain both the similarities and differences of each item in the question. Let’s look at an
example question, which has been adapted from the 2021 VCAA Exam and solution.
Question
Digesters use bacteria to convert organic waste into biogas. Both biogas and coal seam
gas have the same hydrocarbon as their main component. Referring specifically to this
hydrocarbon, compare biogas and coal seam gas.
 VCAA 2021
Answer
Similarities:
Both are types of fuels that contain mainly methane, CH4.
Differences:
• Coal seam gas is non-renewable as it originally comes from the increased
temperature and pressure experienced by sedimentary rock deeper below Earth’s
surface and is not produced at a rate equal to or faster than it is consumed.
• On the other hand, biogas is renewable, as it is produced from the breakdown of plant
matter, in particular cellulose and starch, by bacteria under anaerobic conditions.
Notice that in this answer, the comparison word ‘whereas’ was used to differentiate
between the difference of the two fuels.
This was just one example for two fuels covered in this chapter, but other examples
may require you to compare two different types of fossil fuels or two different types of
biofuels, the advantages and/or disadvantages of different fuels or their renewability.
Developing a clear set of notes with what makes each distinct from the other will be
important for this section.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
16 CHAPTER 1 CARBON-BASED FUELS
Section 1A questions
1 Bioethanol can be produced in organisms through a process known as fermentation.
a Write a balanced chemical equation for fermentation.
b Identify the reactants and products in the equation from your answer to part a.
c What conditions and other substances are required for the fermentation process to
occur effectively?
d State the technique that is employed to purify bioethanol once it has been produced
through fermentation.
2 Discuss the accuracy of the following statement:
‘Crude oil can be classified as a biofuel because it originally comes from plants.’
3 Fossil fuels are recognised as a significant contribution to the increase in greenhouse gas
emissions. Alternative fuels to fossil fuels as an energy source exist but they are not yet
at the stage where they can completely replace them. From different groups, there are
concerns about the suitability of biofuels as a replacement for fossil fuels.
a Define ‘biofuel’.
b List three examples of biofuels.
c Compare bioethanol and biodiesel. In your answer, ensure you refer to how they are
produced and the specific organic compounds they consist of.
d Explain the advantages for society of adding small quantities of these biofuels to
current fossil fuels used for powering automobiles.
e Provide three reasons why it is currently unfeasible to incorporate a higher
percentage of these biofuels into either petrol or diesel fuels.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
1B PRODUCTION OF CHEMICAL ENERGy IN NATURE
17
1B
Production of chemical energy
in nature
Study Design:
•
Photosynthesis as the process that converts
light energy into chemical energy and as a
source of glucose and oxygen for respiration
in living things:
6CO2(g) + 6H2O(l) → C6H12O6(aq) + 6O2(g)
•
Oxidation of glucose as the primary
carbohydrate energy source, including the
balanced equation for cellular respiration:
C6H12O6(aq) + 6O2(g) → 6CO2(g) + 6H2O(l)
Glossary:
Aerobic
Anabolic
Catabolic
Cellular respiration
Oxidation number
Oxidised
ENGAGE
The carbon economy
Have you heard of the carbon economy? Perhaps you’re more familiar with the term
‘carbon footprint’. Both of these relate to carbon dioxide emissions. As you learned in
Unit 2, carbon dioxide emissions (a type of greenhouse gas) are primarily responsible
for global warming and climate change. Carbon dioxide is released naturally through
processes like cellular respiration, which you will learn more about in this chapter,
and fermentation. However, other human activities, such as deforestation and the
burning of fossil fuels, which you will learn more about in Section 1C, have been the
main producers of the gas. For decades, efforts have been made to monitor and lower
these emissions. Governments and industries are continually improving the efficiency
of photosynthesis, which is the way carbon dioxide is naturally removed from the
atmosphere. The benefits of this improvement will be twofold. The world’s population
is growing rapidly and greater quantities of food will be needed to support future
generations. Not only will there be less carbon dioxide in the atmosphere, but it is
thought that increasing the efficiency of photosynthesis will mean more nutrient-rich
crops and increased crop yields. Governments and industries also want to increase
the production of biomass, a sustainable and renewable energy resource, in the hope
that this will reduce our reliance on fossil fuels and again reduce the volume of carbon
dioxide in the atmosphere.
LINK UNIT 2
LINK
1C EXOTHERMIC
AND
ENDOTHERMIC
REACTIONS
Figure 1B–1 The rise in carbon dioxide levels in the atmosphere is responsible for global warming
and climate change.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
Anabolic
a biochemical
process requiring
energy, where
simple molecules
combine to
generate complex
molecules
Cellular respiration
the transformation
of the chemical
energy stored
in glucose into
usable energy
(ATP) for cells
1A TYPES OF
FUELS
18 CHAPTER 1 CARBON-BASED FUELS
EXPLAIN
Photosynthesis
Photosynthesis is an anabolic chemical reaction in which the Sun’s light energy is used to
convert the inorganic compounds carbon dioxide (CO2) and water (H2O) into the organic
compound glucose (C6H12O6). Glucose can then be used as a source of energy by the cells
of living organisms, enabling growth and reproduction.
Photosynthesis consists of a series of steps (a biochemical pathway), with each step
controlled by a different enzyme. The overall process of photosynthesis can be written as
both a word equation and a balanced chemical equation:
carbon dioxide + water oxygen + glucose
light energy
light energy
light energy
6 6 6
CO (g) H O(l) 6 6 6
+ 6 6 6
2 2 2
+  →  C H O (aq)
CO (g) H O(l) CO (g) H O(l) 2 2 2
2 2 2
+  →  C H O (aq)
+  →  C H O (aq)
O (g)
O (g)
O (g)
+
+ 6 12 6
+ 6 12 6
+ 6 12 6
chlorophyll
chlorophyll
chlorophyll
Water
(H2O)
O
H H
O
H H
O
H H
O
H H
O O
O O
O O
O O
O O
O O
Oxygen
(O2)
The oxygen released is
considered a waste product
from a photosynthesis
perspective. However, this
is a very important reactant
for cellular respiration in both
plants and animals. The glucose
produced from photosynthesis
in plants is the key reactant
required for cellular respiration
in living organisms, as you
will see later in this chapter.
As you learned in Section 1A,
glucose is also the key input for
fermentation in the production
of bioethanol from plants
and yeast.
Photosynthesis is an example
of an endothermic reaction,
which you will learn about in
Section 1C.
LINK
Light energy
O OC
Carbon
O OC
dioxide
(CO2)
O OC
O OC
O OC
Glucose
(C6H12O6)
H
1C EXOTHERMIC
AND
ENDOTHERMIC
REACTIONS
LINK
O
O H H
H H
Water
O
H H
O
H H
Water
O
O
H H
H
Figure 1B–2 The initial reactants and final products of
photosynthesis
NOTE
5B FACTORS
AFFECTING
REACTION RATE
LINK
There are many factors that affect the rate of the photosynthesis reaction, such as temperature,
light availability, water availability, carbon dioxide concentration and enzyme (catalyst)
concentration. Factors affecting the frequency and success of collisions between reactants, and
the subsequent rate of chemical reactions, are explored further in Section 5B.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
1B PRODUCTION OF CHEMICAL ENERGy IN NATURE
19
Check-in questions – Set 1
1 What is the purpose of photosynthesis?
2 a Write the word equation for photosynthesis.
b Write the simplified balanced chemical equation for photosynthesis.
Cellular respiration
Like photosynthesis, cellular respiration occurs as a series of steps in a biochemical
pathway, with each step controlled by a different enzyme. You do not need to be familiar
with any of these steps in this chemistry course. The purpose of cellular respiration is the
catabolic breakdown of glucose, which releases the chemical energy in a form more usable
for cells, as a molecule called adenosine triphosphate (ATP).
There are two types of cellular respiration. The first occurs in the absence of oxygen
(anaerobic) and is commonly referred to as fermentation. You learned about this in
Section 1A. This occurs in certain plants and yeast, resulting in the production of ethanol
(bioethanol) and carbon dioxide, according to the following equation:
glucose → ethanol + carbon dioxide
C6H12O6(aq) → 2CH3CH2OH(aq) + 2CO2(g)
In animals, a slightly different form of anaerobic cellular respiration takes place. It is often
called lactic acid fermentation and results in the production of lactic acid (lactate ions),
which is associated with muscle cramping. This chemical reaction is represented according
to the following equation:
Catabolic
a biochemical
process releasing
energy, in
which complex
molecules are
broken down
into simple
molecules
LINK 1A TYPES OF
FUELS
glucose → lactic acid
C6H12O6(aq) → 2CH3CH(OH)COOH(aq)
The second form of cellular respiration occurs in the presence of oxygen (aerobic). This
occurs in many plant and animal cells with some steps occurring inside the mitochondria,
the energy powerhouse of the cell. Aerobic cellular respiration results in a much greater
yield of energy per mole of glucose than that yielded by anaerobic cellular respiration.
O2 + C6H12O6
Aerobic
an organism
or process that
requires the
presence of free
oxygen
Photosynthesis
Light energy
Chemical energy
(ATP)
Chloroplast
Mitochondrion
CO2 + H2O
Cellular respiration
Figure 1B–3 An overview of the relationship between photosynthesis and aerobic cellular
respiration
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
20 CHAPTER 1 CARBON-BASED FUELS
Oxidised
describes
a chemical
species that
has undergone
oxidation – that
is, it has lost
electrons in a
reaction
In aerobic cellular respiration, glucose is oxidised to form carbon dioxide and water. The
chemical reaction for aerobic cellular respiration is:
glucose + oxygen → water + carbon dioxide
0 +1 –2 0 +1 –2 +4 –2
C6H12O6(aq) + 6O2(g) → 6H2O(l) + 6CO2(g)
NOTE
You should notice from this equation that the products of this chemical reaction are the inputs
for the photosynthesis reaction.
UNIT 2
LINK
3A REDUCTION
AND OXIDATION LINK
1A TYPES OF
FUELS
1C EXOTHERMIC
AND
ENDOTHERMIC
REACTIONS
5B FACTORS
AFFECTING
REACTION RATE
LINK
LINK
LINK
You will recall from Unit 2, and this will again be covered in Section 3A, that oxidation
means a loss of electrons. If you look at the oxidation numbers, in red, shown above the
balanced chemical equation, you will see that the carbon changes from a ‘0’ to a ‘+4’
oxidation number. This means it is losing electrons. Conversely, the oxygen gas reactant is
being reduced, as it changes oxidation number from ‘0’ to ‘+2’.
As glucose can be broken down to release the energy required for all metabolic reactions
occurring in our bodies’ cells, it is a type of fuel. Like the other fuels you learned about in
Section 1A, it undergoes a combustion reaction that releases energy, which means it is an
exothermic reaction. Exothermic combustion reactions will be discussed in more detail in
Section 1C.
As in photosynthesis, there are many factors which affect the rate of cellular respiration
reactions, such as temperature, glucose availability, oxygen concentration and enzyme
(catalyst) concentration. Factors affecting the frequency and success of collisions between
reactants, and the subsequent rate of chemical reactions, are explored further in Section 5B.
Oxidation
number
a measure of
the degree of
oxidation of
an atom in a
substance;
defined as the
charge an atom
might have
when electrons
are counted to
help identify
redox reactions,
oxidising agents
and reducing
agents
WORKSHEET
1B–1
ENERGY
PRODUCTION
IN PLANTS AND
ANIMALS
DOC
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
1B PRODUCTION OF CHEMICAL ENERGy IN NATURE
21
1B SKILLS
Understanding the link between photosynthesis and cellular respiration
An overview of the processes of photosynthesis and cellular respiration is given in the
diagram below.
Mitochondrion
Animal cell
VIDEO 1B–1
SKILLS:
UNDERSTANDING
THE LINK BETWEEN
PHOTOSYNTHESIS
AND CELLULAR
RESPIRATION
Cellular
respiration
Adenosine
triphosphate
ATP
Energy for life processes
Plant cell
Carbon
dioxide
CO2
Water
H2O
Oxygen
O2
Glucose
C6H12O6
Photosynthesis Photosynthesis
Light energy
Chloroplast
Figure 1B–4 The complementary nature of the photosynthesis and cellular respiration reactions
means that carbon, hydrogen and oxygen cycle through organisms and their environments continually.
Referring to Figure 1B–4, note the following key points.
• Photosynthesis occurs in the chloroplast, an organelle found only in the cells of green
plants and algae.
• The products of photosynthesis (oxygen and glucose) are used as reactants in the
process of aerobic cellular respiration.
• Aerobic cellular respiration occurs mostly in mitochondria, organelles found in
animal, plant and fungal cells, and protists.
• Aerobic cellular respiration uses the products of photosynthesis to produce ATP,
an energy storage molecule, which can then release energy to meet the cell’s
requirements.
• In plants, the products of aerobic cellular respiration (water and carbon dioxide) can
then be used as reactants in the process of photosynthesis.
• Although photosynthesis appears to be the reverse of cellular respiration, the
processes are different and use different enzymes. (You will learn in general about
enzymes in Section 12B.)
Using the Study Design to guide your preparation
The most important way of determining the detail you need to know is by looking at
the Study Design and completing many practice questions. Keep focused on the terms
used in the Study Design dot points and, when making notes, always use the dot points,
or part of the dot points, as your headings. The Study Design was written specifically to
cover what you need to know, and the success criteria have been written to guide you
through the necessary material.
For example, the Study Design requires you to know that photosynthesis is a source of
both glucose and oxygen, which are required for respiration in living things, and that it is
in these living things where the glucose is oxidised as the primary energy source.
LINK 12B
ENZYMES
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
22 CHAPTER 1 CARBON-BASED FUELS
Additionally, both chemical equations are given for you. This suggests that, if you know
these things, you will be able to work through and determine the answers to assessment
questions. Consider the following diagram and predict what the questions could be,
based on what you know of the Study Design.
Light and chlorophyll
Process A
Water and product C Products D and E
Process B
Energy for cellular processes
12B ENZYMES
LINK
5B FACTORS
AFFECTING
REACTION RATE
LINK
Possible questions could be:
• Determine what processes A and B are.
• Write word and balanced chemical equations for processes A and B.
• List where processes A and B occur.
• Identify products C, D and E.
Also keep in mind the interrelationships between concepts. Section 12B will look in
more detail at the structure and role of enzymes in helping catalyse (speed up) specific
reactions. Chapter 5 will investigate the factors that affect rates of chemical reactions,
which are relevant to these two processes.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
1B PRODUCTION OF CHEMICAL ENERGy IN NATURE
23
Section 1B questions
1 Light energy is converted into what form of energy during photosynthesis?
2 Students were investigating the relationship between the number of oxygen bubbles
produced by an aquatic green plant and the light intensity it was exposed to. They set
up two beakers with similarly sized sections of aquatic plant and placed one in the shade
and one next to a light source. The students recorded the number of bubbles given off by
each plant in two minutes. They then moved the plant near the light source, 10 cm away,
and repeated their recordings. They continued moving the plant back in 10 cm intervals
until the plant was 50 cm away from the light source.
Thermometer
Light
source
Oxygen
Oxygen bubbles
Test tube
Light
energy
Beaker
Water
Funnel (inverted)
Aquatic plant
Their results for the plant that was placed
in the light were graphed and shown on
the right.
a What chemical reaction does the
production of oxygen indicate is
occurring in the aquatic green plant?
b Write a balanced chemical equation
to represent the reaction from your
answer to part a above.
c From your understanding of this
Number of bubbles of oxygen in 2 minutes
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
process, which beaker is the students’
0
control?
10 20 30 40 50
Distance from light source (cm)
d State the independent variable (what is being changed) and the dependent variable
(what is being measured) in the students’ investigation.
e Explain the trend observed in the data shown on the graph. Make sure to refer to
specific data in your answer.
3 Cells cannot directly use the chemical energy stored in glucose.
a Compare and contrast the two processes that break down glucose in plants and
animals. In your answer, include the chemical equation for each of these.
b The Study Design refers to the ‘oxidation of glucose as the primary carbohydrate
energy source’. Explain what this sentence means to someone who has a limited
understanding of chemistry.
4 Outline the relationship between the reactants and products of cellular respiration and
photosynthesis.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
24 CHAPTER 1 CARBON-BASED FUELS
•
1C Exothermic and endothermic reactions
Study Design:
Glossary:
Comparison of exothermic and endothermic
Activation energy
reactions, with reference to bond making and
Complete combustion
bond breaking, including enthalpy changes (ΔH)
Endothermic
measured in kJ, molar enthalpy changes measured
Enthalpy
in kJ mol–1 and enthalpy changes for mixtures
Enthalpy change
measured in kJ g–1, and their representations in
Exothermic
energy profile diagrams
Incomplete combustion
Determination of limiting reactants or reagents in
chemical reactions
Combustion (complete and incomplete) reactions
of fuels as exothermic reactions; the writing of
balanced thermochemical equations, including
states, for the complete and incomplete combustion
of organic molecules using experimental data and
data tables
•
•
ENGAGE
It’s getting hot!
What do composting vegetable waste and burning a candle have in common? While
it may seem like the answer should be ‘not much at all’, they are in fact linked as they
both involve chemical reactions that release heat into the environment! In this section,
you are going to gain an understanding of two different types of reactions and how they
either release or absorb heat from the environment. You will also investigate a specific
type of exothermic reaction, called combustion reactions, as a way of obtaining energy
from fuels. Lastly, you will learn how to draw energy profile diagrams to represent the
reactions occurring during these processes.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
1C EXOTHERMIC AND ENDOTHERMIC REACTIONS
25
EXPLAIN
Exothermic and endothermic reactions
For a chemical reaction to occur, the bonds within the reactants must first be broken.
This requires energy and the exact quantity of energy is specific for each reaction. Every
reaction has a minimum amount of energy that is needed for the reaction to occur –
this is known as the activation energy and is represented by the symbol E
. As a reaction
a
proceeds, new bonds must be formed to generate the products. Unlike breaking bonds,
this process releases energy. This can be summarised by the following statements:
Breaking bonds: requires energy from the environment
Forming bonds: releases energy to the environment
The chemical energy of a substance is called its enthalpy or heat content and has the
symbol H. The overall change in energy from reactants to products is known as the
enthalpy change (∆H). The enthalpy change indicates whether more energy was required
to break the reactant bonds than was released forming the product bonds or vice versa. It
can be represented by the equation:
Δ H(reaction) = Σ H(reactant bonds broken) – Σ H(product bonds formed)
From this equation, we can see that there are two possible outcomes.
1 The energy required to break the bonds of the reactants is greater than the energy
released from forming the bonds in the products. In this instance, the ∆H will be
positive, and the reaction is referred to as an endothermic reaction.
2 The energy required to break the bonds of the reactants is less than the energy released
from forming the bonds in the products. In this instance, the ∆H will be negative, and
the reaction is referred to as an exothermic reaction.
Exothermic and endothermic reactions can be illustrated using energy profile diagrams
(Figure 1C–1).
Activation energy
the minimum
quantity of
energy required
so that a
chemical reaction
can proceed
Enthalpy
the internal
energy of a
chemical system
(plus the product
of pressure and
volume)
Enthalpy change
the difference in
enthalpy between
reactants and
products in
a chemical
reaction;
symbol ΔH
Endothermic
a reaction that
has a positive
enthalpy
change value
and absorbs
heat from the
environment
Exothermic
a reaction that
has a negative
enthalpy change
value and
releases heat to
the environment
Ea
Energy
Reactants
Energy
Ea
Products
Reactants
ΔH
ΔH
Products
Progress of reaction Progress of reaction
Figure 1C–1 Exothermic (left) and endothermic (right) reactions can be illustrated using energy
profile diagrams. These diagrams show the activation energy (Ea) of the reaction, as well as the
quantity of energy released or absorbed (∆H).
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
26 CHAPTER 1 CARBON-BASED FUELS
Enthalpy change (∆H) has the units of joules, J (or more commonly kJ), kJ mol–1 or kJ g–1
.
Table 1C–1 Enthalpy change units and when they are commonly used
Unit Circumstance when the unit is commonly used
J (or kJ) When the overall energy released is the important consideration
kJ mol–1 When the energy released per mole of compound is of interest. This should be
used when a comparison of fuel sources is required and the fuels in question
are composed of a single compound (e.g. pure substances only).
kJ g–1 When the energy released per gram of a substance is of interest. This should be
used when a comparison of fuel sources is required, but the fuels in question
are composed of multiple compounds, making it impossible to accurately
calculate kJ mol–1. It can also be used as an alternative to kJ mol–1 for fuels with
only one compound.
2B MEASURING
ENERGY
RELEASED FROM
CHEMICAL
REACTIONS
LINK
Calculating the value for the enthalpy change of a reaction can be important in
understanding the energy content of fuels and foods. This will be covered in more depth
in Section 2B.
It is important to note that in an exothermic reaction, where the ∆H is negative, the
products are at a lower energy level than the reactants. This means that in an exothermic
reaction the products are more stable than the reactants.
It is the opposite when considering an endothermic reaction, where the ∆H is positive.
In these reactions, the reactants, which are at a lower energy level than the products, are
more stable.
Key points and differences between exothermic and endothermic reactions are summarised
in Table 1C–2.
Table 1C–2 Key features of exothermic and endothermic reactions
Exothermic Endothermic
∆H is negative∆H is positive
Reactions release energy/heat to the
environment.
Reactions absorb energy/heat from the
environment.
Products are more stable than the reactants. Reactants are more stable than the products.
Must overcome the activation energy
to proceed
Must overcome the activation energy
to proceed
Check-in questions – Set 1
1 What is the difference between an exothermic reaction and an endothermic reaction?
2 Is the enthalpy change for an endothermic reaction positive or negative? Explain why.
3 What is the minimum quantity of energy required for a reaction to proceed?
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
1C EXOTHERMIC AND ENDOTHERMIC REACTIONS
27
Combustion of fuels
Earlier in this chapter, we discussed fuels as sources of energy. To obtain energy from these
types of fuels, they must undergo combustion reactions. Combustion reactions involve
reacting an organic fuel in the presence of oxygen gas, and produce carbon dioxide, water
and heat energy. As heat energy is released as part of these reactions, all combustion
reactions are exothermic.
Knowledge of combustion reactions means they can be employed in society’s favour. This
can allow for more efficient consumption of petrol in a car or to maximise the energy
produced in thermal power plants. With the increasing severity of bushfires in Australia,
there has been a growing resurgence of interest in examining the techniques of First
Nations cultural (or cool) burning, the oldest known farming practice in the world. First
Nations rangers and traditional owners in the Kimberley region in northern Western
Australia perform targeted burnings during the early dry season (March to July) to
minimise the most dangerous season for bushfires (August to November).
Combustion reactions can be represented by thermochemical equations, which not only
show the reactants and products of the reaction, but also the energy released.
Let’s start by writing the balanced equation for the complete combustion of methane:
CH4(g) + 2O2(g) → CO2(g) + 2H2O(g)
The first thing that you might notice in the above equation is that water is present in
the gaseous state (that is, as water vapour), rather than as a liquid. This is because all
combustion reactions occur at high temperatures that are above the boiling point of water.
This equation, however, is not a thermochemical equation. For this, we need to add in the
enthalpy change data for the combustion of methane. For many common fuels, the heat of
combustion has been determined experimentally, and the values are provided in the VCAA
Data Book. Using this, we see that the heat of combustion for methane is given as 55.6 kJ g–1
or 890 kJ mol–1. This can then be added to our balanced equation to give us a complete
thermochemical equation as follows:
CH4(g) + 2O2(g) → CO2(g) + 2H2O(l) ∆H = –890 kJ mol–1
LINK 1A TYPES OF
FUELS
Complete
combustion
a combustion
reaction of
organic fuel that
takes place in
the presence of
excess oxygen
gas to produce
carbon dioxide
and water
NOTE
You will notice that in the thermochemical equation, the state for the water produced is now
liquid (l). This is because all reactants and products must be in their standard states at SLC
(standard laboratory conditions; 25ºC, 100 kPa).
With this information, it is possible to calculate the quantity of heat released from
the combustion of methane in almost any given situation at 25ºC and 100 kPa. This
thermochemical equation tells us that the combustion of one mole of methane releases
890 kJ of energy. If two moles of methane underwent combustion, 1780 kJ of energy (that is,
2 × 890) would be released. You will learn more about how to perform these calculations
in Section 2A. In these instances, we are assuming that the fuel continues to react until
it is all gone. This is true if the reaction takes place with an abundance of oxygen gas;
however, this isn’t always the case. If the oxygen is depleted before the fuel, the reaction
is known as incomplete combustion. Due to the lack of oxygen present, different carbon-
containing products are formed from this reaction: solid carbon, carbon monoxide gas
LINK
2A MEASURING
GREENHOUSE
GASES
Incomplete
combustion
a combustion
reaction of
organic fuel
that takes place
when oxygen
is the limiting
reagent to
produce carbon
monoxide and
water
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
28 CHAPTER 1 CARBON-BASED FUELS
and carbon dioxide gas. Shown below is one possible equation for the incomplete
combustion of methane, where carbon monoxide, rather than carbon dioxide, is the only
carbon-containing product generated:
2CH4(g) + 3O2(g) → 2CO(g) + 4H2O(l)
If incomplete combustion occurs, the energy released will be less than if complete
combustion occurs. To determine whether complete or incomplete combustion will occur in
certain circumstances, we need to understand the concept of limiting and excess reagents.
NOTE
In some cases of incomplete combustion, solid carbon, C(s), is also produced as a product. This
can be observed as soot.
Limiting and excess reagents
In Unit 2, you learned about a variety of different applications where you may be required
UNIT 2
LINK
to perform stoichiometric calculations. As part of this, you were introduced to the concept
of mole ratios, which are represented by the coefficients in a chemical equation and provide
VIDEO 1C–1
LIMITING
AND EXCESS
REAGENTS
information about the relative amounts of each compound needed for the reaction to occur.
In a way, this is similar to how a recipe provides instructions on the different quantities of
ingredients required to make a meal or bake a cake.
Let’s look at part of a hypothetical recipe for a banana cake. As well as other ingredients, the
recipe says that to make one cake we need:
• 3 bananas
• 2 eggs
• 1 cup of milk.
Pantry 1 Pantry 2 Pantry 3
Figure 1C–2 Using cake ingredients to model
mole ratios
We can essentially express this in the same way that we would a
balanced chemical reaction:
3 bananas + 2 eggs + 1 cup of milk → 1 banana cake
This shows us that the numbers (or coefficients) in front of each
ingredient provide the ratio required to make our product, the
banana cake. Now let’s look at the ingredients contained within
three potential pantries (Figure 1C–2).
Referring to our original recipe equation, we need: 3 bananas,
2 eggs and 1 cup of milk.
For each pantry, our equation looks like this:
Pantry 1: 3 bananas + 2 eggs + 1 cup of milk → ? banana cakes
Pantry 2: 3 bananas + 4 eggs + 2 cups of milk → ? banana cakes
Pantry 3: 6 bananas + 3 eggs + 2 cups of milk → ? banana cakes
In each instance, you can see that we need to work out the total
number of banana cakes that we can make from the ingredients
that we have.
In pantry 1, we have the exact number of each ingredient required by the original recipe to
make a single banana cake.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
1C EXOTHERMIC AND ENDOTHERMIC REACTIONS
29
In pantry 2, we can see that we have double the number of eggs and double the number
of cups of milk required to make a single banana cake. However, if we wanted to make
two banana cakes, we would also need 6 bananas. We only have 3 bananas in this pantry,
which is only enough to make 1 banana cake. In this instance, the bananas are our limiting
ingredient (or reagent). In contrast, the eggs and milk will both be present in excess.
In pantry 3, we can see that we have double the number of bananas and double the
number of cups of milk required to make a single banana cake. However, if we wanted to
make 2 banana cakes, we would also need 4 eggs. While we have more eggs than we need
to make a single cake (2 eggs), we still have less than we need to make 2 cakes (4 eggs).
This means that in this pantry, the eggs are our limiting ingredient and the bananas and
milk will both be present in excess.
From this example, it should be clear that we can only make as many cakes as our limiting
ingredient allows. By applying our ingredient ratios to pantry 3 and only focusing on the
limiting ingredient, we can calculate the following:
2 eggs: 1 cake
3 eggs: 1.5 cakes
While this example may have just made you crave banana cake, it also illustrates perfectly
the concept of limiting and excess reagents and how they can be used to calculate the
theoretical amount of product that can be generated from a chemical reaction.
Let’s now look at a specific worked example using the combustion of methane.
Worked example 1C–1: Determining the limiting reagent
VIDEO
WORKED
EXAMPLE 1C–1
A 2.0 mol sample of methane (CH4) reacts in the presence of 6.0 mol of oxygen (O2) to
produce carbon dioxide (CO2) and water (H2O). Determine the limiting reagent in this
reaction.
Solution
Logic Process
Step 1 Write a balanced equation for the
reaction.
CH4(g) + 2O2(g) → CO2(g) + 2H2O(g)
Step 2 Write the relevant information provided
in the question under the equation.
CH4(g) + 2O2(g) → CO2(g) + 2H2O(g)
n(CH4) = 2.0 mol; n(O2) = 6.0 mol
Step 3 Calculate the number of moles of
each reactant using coefficients in the
equation.
n(CH4) : n(O2) = 1 : 2
So, 2 mol of CH4 would react with
4 mol of O2.
Step 4 Based on the moles present of one
reactant, work out how much would
be required of the other, based on the
mole ratio in the equation.
4 mol of O2 required
6 mol of O2 present
O2 present > O2 required
Step 5 Determine if the amount of the second
reagent is more or less than what is
required from Step 3.
There is more oxygen present than
required.
Step 6 State the limiting reagent. Methane is the limiting reagent.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
30 CHAPTER 1 CARBON-BASED FUELS
As you can see in Worked example 1C–1, the oxygen is in excess and so this will lead to
complete combustion. You can also see from this example that we need to know the moles
of each reactant to determine the limiting and excess reagents. However, if you are given a
mass, as in the following example, you need to complete an extra step.
VIDEO
WORKED
EXAMPLE 1C–2
Worked example 1C–2: Determining the limiting reagent in moles
Methane (CH4) reacts in the presence of oxygen (O2) to produce carbon monoxide (CO)
and water (H2O). Initially, 8.0 g of methane and 16.0 g of oxygen are present. Determine
the limiting reagent in this reaction.
Solution
Logic Process
Step 1 Write a balanced equation for
the reaction.
2CH4(g) + 3O2(g) → 2CO(g) + 4H2O(g)
Step 2 Write the relevant information
provided in the question under
the equation.
2CH4(g) + 3O2(g) → 2CO(g) + 4H2O(g)
m = 8.0 g m = 16.0 g
Step 3 Calculate the amount, in mol,
of each reactant.
n(CH4) = m
M
n(CH4) = 8.0 g
16.0 g mol–1
n(CH4) = 0.50 mol
n(O2) = m
M
n(O2) = 16.0 g
32.0 g mol–1
n(O2) = 0.50 mol
Step 4 Based on the moles present
of one reactant, work out how
much would be required of the
other, based on the mole ratio
in the equation.
n(CH4) : n(O2) = 2 : 3
0.50 mol of O2 would react with 0.33 mol
of CH4.
Step 5 Determine if the amount of the
second reagent is more or less
than what is required from
Step 3.
0.33 mol of CH4 required
0.50 mol of CH4 present
CH4 present > CH4 required
Step 6 State the limiting reagent. As there is more CH4 present than required,
CH4 is the excess reagent, making O2 the
limiting reagent.
Lastly, once we have determined the limiting reagent, we can also use this information
to calculate the amount or mass of a product, or the quantity of heat in the case of
combustion, that is generated from the reaction. This type of question is illustrated in
Worked example 1C–3.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
1C EXOTHERMIC AND ENDOTHERMIC REACTIONS
31
Worked example 1C–3: Determining the mass of the product or the quantity
of heat
VIDEO
WORKED
EXAMPLE 1C–3
Using the reaction from Worked example 1C–2, determine the mass of carbon
monoxide that would be produced. We will start from the beginning and add extra steps
at the end to show how this question could be done in its entirety.
Solution
Logic Process
Step 1 Write a balanced equation for
the reaction.
2CH4(g) + 3O2(g) → 2CO(g) + 4H2O(g)
Step 2 Write the relevant information
provided in the question under
the equation.
2CH4(g) + 3O2(g) → 2CO(g) + 4H2O(g)
m = 8.0 g m = 16.0 g
Step 3 Calculate the amount, in mol,
of each reactant.
n(CH4) = m
M
n(CH4) = 8.0 g
16.0 g mol–1
n(CH4) = 0.50 mol
n(O2) = m
M
n(O2) = 16.0 g
32.0 g mol–1
n(O2) = 0.50 mol
Step 4 Based on the moles present
of one reactant, work out how
much would be required of the
other, based on the mole ratio
in the equation.
n(CH4) : n(O2) = 2 : 3
0.50 mol of O2 would react with 0.33 mol
of CH4.
Step 5 Determine if the amount of the
second reagent is more or less
than what is required from
Step 3.
0.33 mol of CH4 required
0.50 mol of CH4 present
CH4 present > CH4 required
Step 6 State the limiting reagent. As there is more CH4 present than required,
CH4 is the excess reagent, making O2 the
limiting reagent.
Step 7 Use the number of moles of the
limiting reagent and the mole
ratio to calculate the number of
moles of the desired product.
n(O2) : n(CO) = 3 : 2
n(O2) = 0.50 mol
n(C0 produced) = 2
3
× 0.50 = 0.33 mol
Step 8 Use n =
m
to calculate the
M
mass in grams produced.
n(CO) = m
M
m(CO) = n × M
m(CO) = 0.33 mol × 28.0 g mol–1
m(CO produced) = 9.3 g
Linking this back to combustion reactions, we can now understand the main difference
between complete and incomplete combustion and summarise it as follows:
• complete combustion: the fuel is the limiting reagent, oxygen is the excess reagent
• incomplete combustion: the fuel is the excess reagent, oxygen is the limiting reagent.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
32 CHAPTER 1 CARBON-BASED FUELS
It is important to always be aware of limiting and excess reagents when performing
calculations for chemical reactions. It will not always be clearly indicated that this is a
required step, but it is important in order to obtain the correct answer.
VIDEO 1C–2
SKILLS:
REPRESENTING
AND ANALYSING
ENERGY
PROFILE
DIAGRAMS
1C SKILLS
Representing and analysing energy profile diagrams
Being able to draw fully labelled energy profile diagrams is an important skill for
assessments. However, you also need to be able to explain what each part of the energy
profile diagram represents, as well as connect this to key chemistry terms for this topic.
Consider the example shown below.
Energy from the environment
required to break bonds in
the reactant(s)
Energy released to the
environment in the forming
of bonds in the product(s)
Activation energy (Ea)
*The double-headed arrow must extend
from the base energy of the reactants to the
peak of the graph. Therefore, it is good to
include a dotted line using a ruler.*
Energy
Reactants
Products
Enthalpy change, (∆H ), representing
the difference in energy between the
reactants and the products
Progress of reaction
Initial energy stored
in the reactants
Final energy stored
in the products
An energy profile diagram like the one above could be given to you in a question. The
following are some example tasks that you may be asked to complete:
•
Label the activation energy (answer shown in purple above).
•
Label OR explain the enthalpy change (answer shown in orange above).
• Describe why the amount of energy increases initially in the energy profile diagram
(answer shown in green above).
• Describe why the amount of energy decreases following the top of the peak in the energy
profile diagram (answer shown in blue above).
Note, when labelling the activation energy or enthalpy change you need to be precise
with placement of arrows otherwise you will lose marks. Using a ruler to draw a dotted
horizontal line makes this labelling easier.
Another question may be: Does the energy profile diagram represent an exothermic or
an endothermic reaction? Justify your reasoning.
For this question, you should note that as this is a 50:50 choice, you do not get a mark
for making the correct selection. The term ‘justify’ means you need to provide evidence/
reasons why the energy profile diagram is exothermic or why it is not endothermic. As
such, if this was a 2-mark question, your answer should look as follows:
Exothermic (no mark)
The energy of the products is lower than the energy of the reactants (1 mark) OR the
enthalpy change (∆H) is negative. (1 mark)
Whereas, for endothermic reactions the energy of the products is higher than the energy of
the reactants OR the enthalpy change (∆H) is positive. (1 mark)
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
1C EXOTHERMIC AND ENDOTHERMIC REACTIONS
33
Section 1C questions
1 Compare and contrast
exothermic and endothermic
reactions.
2 Octane (C8H18) is a common
hydrocarbon found in petrol.
a Write a balanced
thermochemical equation for
Energy
the combustion of octane.
b Copy the following axes into
your workbook and draw the
energy profile diagram for
the combustion of octane.
On your diagram, label
Progress of reaction
the enthalpy change of the
reaction, ∆H, and the activation energy, E
.
a
3 Sodium metal undergoes a vigorous exothermic reaction with water to produce
hydrogen gas and aqueous sodium hydroxide according to the equation:
2Na(s) + 2H2O(l) → 2NaOH(aq) + H2(g) ∆H = –368 kJ mol–1
A 0.500 g piece of sodium metal is placed in a beaker containing 100 mL of water.
a Determine the limiting reagent in this reaction.
b Determine the mass of hydrogen gas that would be produced.
c Determine the concentration, in mol L–1, of sodium hydroxide present after the
reaction has gone to completion.
d Determine the energy released, in kJ.
4 A mixture contains equal parts by mass of methanol and ethanol. (Heat of combustion
of methanol = 22.7 kJ g–1; Heat of combustion of ethanol = 29.6 kJ g–1)
A 100 g sample of this fuel mixture undergoes complete combustion in excess oxygen.
a Calculate the mass of each product.
b Calculate the energy released, in MJ.
c Calculate the mass of carbon dioxide gas released.
d Calculate the mass of the fuel mixture
required to undergo complete
combustion to produce 100 kJ
of energy.
240
5 Using the energy profile diagram on the
200
right, answer the following questions.
a Does the energy profile diagram depict
an endothermic or an exothermic
reaction? Justify your reasoning.
b What is the enthalpy change, ∆H, of
Energy (kJ mol–1)
160
120
80
the reaction?
40
c What is the activation energy, E
a, of
0
the reaction?
Progress of reaction
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
34
Chapter 1 review
Summary
Create your own set of summary notes for this chapter, on paper or in a digital document. A model
summary is provided in the Teacher Resources and can be used to compare with yours.
Checklist
In the Interactive Textbook, the success criteria are linked from the review questions and will be
automatically ticked when answers are correct. Alternatively, print or photocopy this page and tick
the boxes when you have answered the corresponding questions correctly.
Success criteria – I am now able to: Linked questions
1A.1  Define ‘fossil fuels’, ‘biofuels’, ‘renewable’ and
‘non-renewable’
1A.2 1A.3 1A.4 1A.5 1A.6 1A.7  Compare and contrast the different types of fossil fuels  Compare and contrast the different types of biofuels  Describe the process of producing bioethanol from glucose  Recall that distillation is used in the production of bioethanol  State the equation for the fermentation of glucose  Explain the advantages and disadvantages of fossil fuels
and biofuels
1B.1  Describe the process of photosynthesis 1B.2  State the equation for photosynthesis 1B.3  Describe the process of cellular respiration 1B.4  State the equation for cellular respiration 1C.1  Compare and contrast exothermic and endothermic reactions 1C.2  Define ‘activation energy’ 1C.3  Define ‘enthalpy’ and ‘enthalpy change’ 1C.4  Draw and fully label energy profiles for exothermic and
endothermic reactions
1C.5 1C.6  Identify the limiting reagent in a given chemical reaction  Calculate the mass, concentration or volume of various reactants
or products in a given chemical equation when a limiting reagent
is present
1C.7 1C.8 1C.9  Compare complete and incomplete combustion reactions of fuels  State that all combustion reactions are exothermic  Determine the balanced thermochemical equation for complete
and incomplete combustion of organic molecules
1☐, 11☐
11☐
4☐
12☐
12☐
12☐
11☐, 12☐
7☐
9☐, 12☐
3☐
12☐
5☐, 11☐
6☐
2☐, 6☐
13☐
10☐, 13☐
13☐
13☐
8☐, 13☐
13☐
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
35
Multiple-choice questions
1 Which of these statements best describes a fuel that is renewable?
A fossil fuels that are produced at the same rate at which they are consumed
B fossil fuels that are produced at a slower rate than they are consumed
C biofuels that are produced at the same rate at which they are consumed
D biofuels that are produced at a slower rate than they are consumed
2 What would be the most appropriate units to compare the enthalpy change of the combustion
of two different fuels, both containing a mixture of components?
A kJ
B kJ g–1
C kJ mol–1
D g mol–1
3 What type of reaction does glucose undergo in cellular respiration?
A oxidation
B reduction
C displacement
D neutralisation
4 Which of the following biofuels is made from decomposing plant and animal materials?
A biogas
B biodiesel
C bioethanol
D biopetroleum
5 In an endothermic reaction, the
A enthalpy change is negative.
B products are more stable than the reactants.
C reaction releases energy in the form of heat.
D energy required to break bonds in the reactants is greater than the energy released to form
the bonds in the products.
6 From the table below, identify the correct explanations for both enthalpy change and activation
energy.
Enthalpy change Activation energy
A The sum of the energy of the products
minus the energy of the reactants
The minimum quantity of energy required
so that a chemical reaction can proceed
B The sum of the energy of the reactants and
the products
The maximum quantity of energy required
to break the bonds in the reactants so that
new products can be formed
C The difference in total energy between
reactants and products in a chemical
reaction
The minimum quantity of energy required
so that a chemical reaction can proceed
D The amount of energy released from the
breaking of bonds
The quantity of energy required to form
bonds in products
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
36
7 In the process of photosynthesis, which of the following best outlines the main energy
transformation taking place?
A light → heat
B light → chemical
C chemical → heat
D carbon dioxide → glucose
8 Both the complete and incomplete combustion of octane, C8H18,
A occur in the presence of excess oxygen gas.
B produce carbon monoxide.
C are exothermic reactions.
D have positive enthalpies.
9 Which of the following shows the correctly balanced chemical equation for photosynthesis?
A 6CO2(g) + 12H2O(l) → 6O2(g) + C6H12O6(aq)
B 6CO2(g) + 6H2O(l) → 6O2(g) + C6H12O6(aq)
C 6CO2(g) + 6H2O(l) → 6O2(g) + C6H6O12(aq)
D C6H12O6(aq) + 6O2(g) → 6CO2(g) + 6H2O(l)
10 Ethane (C2H6) and oxygen react to form carbon dioxide and water. If 0.8 g of ethane reacts with
0.25 g of oxygen, which reactant is limiting?
A oxygen
B ethane
C carbon dioxide
D neither reactant is limiting
Short-answer questions
11 Concerns from society about the rising levels of greenhouse gas emissions are continuing
to drive our focus on aspects of different types of fuels. Coal is one of Australia’s largest
exports; however, the mining and burning of coal is a major contributor to our greenhouse
gas emissions.
a List the two forms of greenhouse gases that are released from the plant remains
during the formation of coal. (1 mark)
b What conditions help to cause the release of these greenhouse gas emissions
from the coal beds? c Coal is an example of a fossil fuel. Explain why, by comparing this to biofuels. (1 mark)
(2 marks)
In the Latrobe Valley, east of Melbourne, an electricity generation company is
planning to replace a thermal power station fired by brown coal with a thermal
plant fired by natural gas. Natural gas offers many potential benefits because it
results in the release of less greenhouse gases.
d Using your knowledge of natural gas, explain why less greenhouse gases
are emitted. (2 marks)
e Would you say that natural gas is renewable? Explain. (1 mark)
f Is the burning of natural gas an example of an exothermic or an endothermic
reaction? Explain. (2 marks)
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
37
g One issue with the location of the natural gas plant further from Melbourne
is that more energy is lost in the transmission of electricity through power lines
than the amount of energy lost by the flow of gas in pipelines. What is one
potential solution to this problem for the electricity company? h Outline why biogas is considered an example of a renewable energy resource. (1 mark)
(2 marks)
12 Bioethanol is primarily produced by the fermentation of glucose and sucrose
by yeast, such as Saccharomyces cerevisiae, or bacteria, such as Escherichia coli.
a Define ‘fermentation’ and include both a word equation and a balanced
chemical equation illustrating the type of fermentation Saccharomyces
cerevisiae would carry out. (3 marks)
b Bioethanol production can also use starch from corn. However, biomass
of this sort must be pretreated prior to fermentation. Define ‘biomass’. (1 mark)
c Outline one advantage and one disadvantage with the use of bioethanol
compared with petrol. (2 marks)
13 In the presence of oxygen, plants and animals can perform aerobic cellular respiration.
Writing balanced chemical equations, explain how the processes of aerobic cellular
respiration and photosynthesis are linked. (3 marks)
14 Propane is a common fuel used in portable burners, such as those found in
camp stoves. In certain situations, there is not enough ventilation for the fuel
to burn completely. This can be quite dangerous, as it leads to the production
of carbon monoxide. Carbon monoxide is a colourless, odourless gas that can
be poisonous if inhaled in large enough quantities. This is one reason why camp
stoves have warnings not to be used inside a tent, as the carbon monoxide
can build up quite quickly and lead to unconsciousness and death.
a Write a balanced chemical equation for the incomplete combustion reaction of
propane occurring at 25°C and 100 kPa, assuming that carbon monoxide is
the only carbon-based product formed. (2 marks)
b Describe how you know that oxygen will be the limiting reactant in this
reaction. (1 mark)
c A standard camping stove comes with 468 g of propane gas in a canister.
If this is burned in the presence of 1050 g of oxygen gas, determine the
mass (in g) of carbon monoxide that will be produced. d Determine the mass of fuel that remains following the reaction. e Calculate the energy released in MJ. f Draw a fully labelled energy profile diagram for this reaction. (2 marks)
(1 mark)
(2 marks)
(4 marks)
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
38
UNIT
3
HOW CAN DESIGN AND INNOVATION HELP
TO OPTIMISE CHEMICAL PROCESSES?
CHAPTER
2
MEASURING CHANGES IN
CHEMICAL REACTIONS
Introduction
Energy is involved in almost every aspect of our lives. The food we eat for
breakfast, lunch and dinner provides our bodies with the energy that they need
to function. The petrol that we use to fill up our cars and motorbikes provides
the energy that they need to run. Electrical energy powers all our equipment
and devices, lights up our homes and helps us communicate all over the world.
In this chapter, we will focus on the energy that is generated from the chemical
reactions involving fuel and food. You will apply stoichiometry to a real-world
problem – the emission of greenhouse gases – and learn how to quantitate the energy
produced from combustion reactions.
Curriculum
Area of Study 1 Outcome 1
What are the current and future options for supplying energy?
Study Design: INTRODUCTION
VIDEO
MEASURING
CHANGES IN
CHEMICAL
REACTIONS
Learning intentions – at the end of the
chapter I will be able to:
• Calculations related to the application of
stoichiometry to reactions involving the
combustion of fuels, including mass–
mass, mass–volume and volume–volume
stoichiometry, to determine heat energy
released, reactant and product amounts and
net volume or mass of major greenhouse
gases (CO2, CH4 and H2O), limited to
standard laboratory conditions (SLC) at 25°C
and 100 kPa
2A Measuring greenhouse gases
2A.1
 Recall principles of stoichiometry in
balancing equations
2A.2  Determine the heat produced from
combustion reactions using the
equation E = ∆H × n
2A.3  Use stoichiometry to calculate reactant
and product amounts, and net volume
or mass of major greenhouse gases
2A.4  Perform calculations involving excess
and limiting reagents in combustion
reactions
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
39
Study Design: Learning intentions – at the end of the
chapter I will be able to:
•
•
•
The use of the specific heat capacity of water
to approximate the quantity of heat energy
released during the combustion of a known
mass of fuel and food
The principles of solution calorimetry,
including determination of the calibration
factor and consideration of the effects of heat
loss; analysis of temperature–time graphs
obtained from solution calorimetry
Energy from fuels and food:
– calculation of energy transformation
efficiency during combustion as a
percentage of chemical energy converted
to useful energy
– comparison and calculations of energy
values of foods containing carbohydrates,
proteins and fats and oils
2B Measuring energy released from
chemical reactions
2B.1  Define ‘specific heat capacity’ and
its units
2B.2  Recall the properties of water that lead
to its use in specific heat experiments
2B.3  Perform calculations using the
equation q = mcΔT
2B.4  State the principles of solution
calorimetry
2B.5  Analyse graphical data to determine
the calibration factor of a calorimeter
2B.6 Use experimental data to calculate
the calibration factor of a calorimeter
and energy produced from chemical
reactions
2B.7 Calculate energy transformation
efficiency from given experimental data
•
Energy from fuels and food:
– calculation of energy transformation
efficiency during combustion as a
percentage of chemical energy converted
to useful energy
– comparison and calculations of energy
values of foods containing carbohydrates,
proteins and fats and oils
VCE Chemistry Study Design extracts © VCAA; reproduced by permission.
Glossary
Calorimetry
Enhanced greenhouse effect
Global warming
Greenhouse gas
Line of best fit
Molar volume
Solution calorimeter
Specific heat capacity
2C Measuring energy from food
2C.1  Use reference tables for heats of
combustion of different food groups
2C.2  Determine the energy content of a food
based on food group composition
2C.3  Calculate the energy content of a food
using calorimetry
Standard laboratory conditions
Stoichiometry
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
40 CONCEPT MAP
Concept map
Sun
Step 1:
The Sun’s radiation in
the form of sunlight
travels towards Earth.
The natural greenhouse effect
Step 2:
Approximately half the
radiation is reflected or
absorbed by Earth’s
atmosphere and clouds.
2A Measuring greenhouse gases
Calculating the quantity of
greenhouse gases produced from
combustion reactions
Step 4:
Earth releases heat in
the form of infrared
radiation (IR). Step 5:
Some IR escapes
into space, allowing
Earth to cool.
Step 6:
The remaining IR is
trapped by gases in the
air, such as CO2, retaining
warmth and allowing
the planet to sustain life.
Step 3:
The remaining radiation
penetrates through to
be absorbed by the land
and oceans.
Thermometer
Stirrer
2B Measuring energy released
from chemical reactions
Using solution calorimetry to
determine the amount of
heat energy released or
absorbed from reactions
Thermally insulated cover
Thermally insulated seal
Reaction mixture
Insulated container
2C Measuring energy from food
Understanding how nutritional
content determines the quantity of
energy contained within food
See the Interactive Textbook for an interactive version of this concept map
interlinked with all concept maps for the course.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
2A MEASURING GREENHOUSE GASES
41
2A Measuring greenhouse gases
Study Design:
Glossary:
•
Calculations related to the application of
Enhanced greenhouse effect
stoichiometry to reactions involving the
Global warming
combustion of fuels, including mass–
Greenhouse gas
mass, mass–volume and volume–volume
Molar volume
stoichiometry, to determine heat energy
Standard laboratory conditions
released, reactant and product amounts and
Stoichiometry
net volume or mass of major greenhouse
gases (CO2, CH4 and H2O), limited to
standard laboratory conditions (SLC) at
25°C and 100 kPa
ENGAGE
Lowering greenhouse gas emissions for global security
In 2015, the Conference of the Parties (COP) to the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change held a summit in Paris that set down a landmark treaty
on greenhouse gas emissions targets that was supported by 196 member nations. In
November 2016, that treaty was ratified and became legally binding. The goal is to limit
global warming to 1.5°C compared to pre-industrial levels and reach peak greenhouse
gas production as soon as possible.
In 2020, countries submitted their plans to reach their peak targets and the global
warming limit. While COP27, held in Egypt in 2022, revealed the political difficulties in
meeting the 1.5°C target, the 2015 Paris Agreement set the wheels in motion for many
countries to set low-carbon solutions, carbon economies and carbon neutrality targets,
all in the name of reaching this goal. This has led to new jobs, new industries and the
hope that by 2030 zero-carbon solutions could be viable options in sectors that currently
represent 70% of global greenhouse gas emissions.
Figure 2A–1 Heads of delegations at the United Nations Summit in Paris, 2015
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
42 CHAPTER 2 MEASURING CHANGES IN CHEMICAL REACTIONS
1C EXOTHERMIC
AND
ENDOTHERMIC
REACTIONS
LINK
EXPLAIN
Greenhouse gases and chemical reactions
Before beginning to explore chemical reactions in more depth, let’s first refresh our
understanding of how greenhouse gases are produced.
Combustion reactions
As you learned in Section 1C, combustion reactions occur when a hydrocarbon is burned
in the presence of oxygen. This results in the production of carbon dioxide (CO2) and
water vapour (H2O), which are greenhouse gases. Other well-known greenhouse gases
include nitrous oxide (N2O), ozone (O3) and methane (CH4). Methane is emitted during
the extraction and transport of natural gas, as well as from livestock and other agricultural
activities. These gases allow sunlight to pass through Earth’s atmosphere, but they trap the
heat that is reflected from the surface, preventing it from radiating out into space. This
process is known as the greenhouse effect, and it is what makes Earth warm enough to
support life as we know it.
Sun
Step 1:
The Sun’s radiation in
the form of sunlight
travels towards Earth.
Greenhouse gas
a gas that
absorbs and
emits infrared
radiation in the
atmosphere,
causing warming
of Earth’s
surface
Enhanced
greenhouse
effect
the change
of the normal
climate
equilibrium on
Earth, primarily
increased global
temperatures;
caused by
increased
emissions of
greenhouse
gases; also
known as global
warming
Global warming
the long-term
warming of
Earth’s surface
temperature,
observed
since the pre-
industrial period
The natural greenhouse effect
Step 2:
Approximately half the
radiation is reflected or
Step 4:
absorbed by Earth’s
Earth releases heat in
atmosphere and clouds.
the form of infrared
radiation (IR). Step 5:
Some IR escapes
into space, allowing
Earth to cool.
Step 6:
The remaining IR is
trapped by gases in the
air, such as CO2, retaining
warmth and allowing
the planet to sustain life.
1C EXOTHERMIC
AND
ENDOTHERMIC
REACTIONS
LINK
Step 3:
The remaining radiation
penetrates through to
be absorbed by the land
and oceans.
Figure 2A–2 A representation of the natural greenhouse effect
However, an increase of these gases, particularly the ones caused by human activity,
such as CO2 and CH4, causes an enhancement of the greenhouse effect, known as the
enhanced greenhouse effect, which leads to global warming and climate change. Being able
to calculate how much greenhouse gas will be produced from a reaction is therefore critical
in determining the suitability of a reaction or process in line with the societal goals of
decreasing global warming.
When writing combustion reactions, it is also standard practice to state the enthalpy of the
given reaction.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
2A MEASURING GREENHOUSE GASES
43
Common combustion reactions
There are several common reactions that produce different greenhouse gases. Carbon
dioxide (CO2) is produced when fossil fuels, such as coal, petrol and natural gas, are burned
for energy. For example, the combustion of octane in a car engine has the equation:
2C8H18(l) + 25O2(g) → 16CO2(g) + 18H2O(l) ∆H = –10 920 kJ mol–1
Not all combustion reactions go to completion. For example, carbon monoxide (CO)
is produced when fuels burn incompletely. For incomplete combustion reactions, the
enthalpy value can vary depending on the conditions. This is because ‘imperfect’ conditions,
such as a lack of oxygen or low temperatures, can lead to incomplete combustion.
Determining heat energy production from the combustion of fuels
Combustion is the chemical process that produces heat energy from the oxidation of fuels.
We can experience the benefits directly around an open fire or indirectly in powering
our homes and vehicles, where the energy from combusted fuels drives other processes.
Combustion reactions are always exothermic – that is, they release heat energy.
To determine the energy released from the combustion of some fuels, we can use the
reference tables found in the VCAA Data book for ‘Molar heat of combustion’, measured in
kJ mol–1, as shown below.
LINK 1A TYPES OF
FUELS
LINK
1C EXOTHERMIC
AND
ENDOTHERMIC
REACTIONS
Table 2A–1 Molar heat of combustion values for some common fuels at 25°C and 100 kPa
Fuel Molecular formula Molar heat of combustion (kJ mol–1)
Methane CH4 890
Propane C3H8 2220
Butane C4H10 2880
Pentane C5H12 3510
Octane C8H18 5460
Methanol CH3OH 726
Ethanol CH3CH2OH 1360
Hydrogen H2 282
Glucose C6H12O6 2840
While heat energy transformation into other forms isn’t 100% efficient, a large portion
of this energy produced from combustion reactions can be put to use. Depending on the
amount of fuel available, which is expressed in moles, a certain amount of energy can be
released, as shown in Worked example 2A–1 on the following page.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
44 CHAPTER 2 MEASURING CHANGES IN CHEMICAL REACTIONS
VIDEO
WORKED
EXAMPLE 2A–1
Worked example 2A–1: Calculating heat energy produced from burning
a fuel sample
A 100.0 kg quantity of ethanol, C2H5OH, is burned in an industrial stove with an open
air-intake. How much energy, in MJ, will be produced if all the ethanol is burned?
Solution
Logic Process
Step 1 Write down the information that you
have about the known substance.
m(C2H5OH) = 100.0 kg = 100 000 g
M(C2H5OH) = 46.0 g mol–1
n(C2H5OH) = ?
Step 2 Calculate the amount of substance
being combusted in moles. m(C2H5OH)
n(C2H5OH) =
M(C2H5OH)
100 000 g
=
46.0 g mol–1
= 2173.9 mol
Step 3 Determine the energy produced by
multiplying n(C2H5OH) by the molar
heat of combustion of ethanol.
E = 1360 kJ mol–1 × 2173.9 mol
= 2 956 504 kJ
Step 4 Convert result to MJ. E =
2 956 504 kJ
1000
= 2960 MJ
Stoichiometry
the quantitative
relationship
between two or
more substances
during a
reaction, based
on the ratio in
which they react
Special conditions of stoichiometry
The amount of energy emitted or required for a reaction can vary considerably, as can
the amount of greenhouse gas produced. It is important to consider two things here:
• The energy value of the enthalpy is in kilojoules.
• The amounts are ‘per mole’ of reference material.
This last point should help us realise how important stoichiometry will be to success in
calculations of greenhouse gas emissions. To do this, we must first be able to successfully
balance an equation.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
2A MEASURING GREENHOUSE GASES
45
Converting stoichiometrically from different units
In addition to basic calculations, there are times when we don’t need to convert to/from
the amount in moles, n, and we can convert stoichiometrically from different units. This is
represented diagrammatically in Figure 2A–3.
Worked example 2A–2: Calculating the moles of product in combustion
VIDEO
WORKED
EXAMPLE 2A–2
When 0.5 mole of pentane is burned in excess oxygen, how many moles of carbon
dioxide are produced?
Solution
Logic Process
Step 1 Write a balanced equation for
the reaction.
C5H12(g) + 8O2(g) → 5CO2(g) + 6H2O(g)
Step 2 Write down the information that you
have about the known substance.
n(C5H12) = 0.5 mol
Step 3 Determine the stoichiometric ratio
from the equation.
From the equation, the coefficient of
pentane is 1 and CO2 is 5.
n(C5H12) : n(CO2) = 1 : 5
Step 4 Use the stoichiometric ratio to
determine the amount of unknown
substance.
5 times the amount of CO2 is produced per
amount of pentane
∴ n(CO2) = 5 × n(C5H12) = 5 × 0.5 = 2.5 mol
Known Unknown
Known mass of
substance
n =
m
Unknown mass of
M m = n × M
substance
From
coefficients
Known moles of
substance (n)
Unknown moles of
substance (n)
in chemical
equation
Standard lab
conditions; known
volume of gas
V
n =
V = n × Vm
Vm
Standard lab
conditions; unknown
volume of gas
n = moles
m = mass (g)
M = molar mass (g mol–1)
V = volume (L)
Vm = molar volume (L mol–1)
Figure 2A–3 Different inputs and how they can get to different outputs through stoichiometric ratios
For example, the result of Worked example 2A–2 can be represented as shown in Figure 2A–4.
C5H12(g) + 8O2(g)
5CO2(g) + 6H2O(g)
2.5 mol(CO2)
Ratio of 5 Ratio of 5
n(C5H12) = 0.5 n(CO2) = 5 × n(C5H12)
5CO2 : 1C5H12
5CO2 : 1C5H12
= 5 × 0.5
= 2.5 mol
Figure 2A–4 Using stoichiometric ratios from Worked example 2A–2
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
46 CHAPTER 2 MEASURING CHANGES IN CHEMICAL REACTIONS
VIDEO
WORKED
EXAMPLE 2A–3
Worked example 2A–3: Calculating the moles of product in combustion
When 11 moles of octane are completely combusted in oxygen, how many moles of
water are produced?
Solution
Logic Process
Step 1 Write a balanced equation for
the reaction.
2C8H18(g) + 25O2(g) → 16CO2(g) + 18H2O(l)
Step 2 Write down the information
that you have about the known
substance.
n(C8H18) = 11 mol
Step 3 Determine the stoichiometric ratio
from the equation.
From the equations, the number in front of
octane is 2 and 18 for H2O.
n(C8H18) : n(H2O) = 2 : 18 = 1 : 9
Step 4 Use the stoichiometric ratio to
determine the amount of unknown
substance.
n(H2O) = 9 × n(C8H18)
= 9 × 11
= 99 moles of water
Check-in questions – Set 1
1 Define the following terms: combustion, greenhouse gas, global warming.
2 Draw a diagram that shows the relationship between all the different formulas for
amount of substance, mass, volume, pressure and temperature.
3 a A promising fuel is hydrogen, as water is the main by-product of its combustion
reaction. What amount of water, in moles, is produced from the combustion of
3.33 moles of hydrogen fuel?
b How much energy is released from the combustion of 3.33 moles of hydrogen fuel?
Mass–mass stoichiometry
For mass–mass stoichiometry, we’re interested in the mass of product produced from a
given mass of reactant or vice versa. To calculate this successfully, we need to determine
the number of moles of the substance we have information for and then follow our ‘down,
across, up’ process, as shown in Figure 2A–3.
1 Convert the given mass of a substance to moles using n =
m
M.
2 Use the mole ratio in the thermochemical equation to determine the moles of the
substance of interest.
3 Calculate the mass of the substance of interest from the moles determined in Step 2
using m = n × M.
This is still making use of the techniques learned earlier but with a specific strategy for
mass–mass questions. We see this in action in Worked example 2A–4.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
Worked example 2A–4: Calculating the mass of a product in combustion
2A MEASURING GREENHOUSE GASES
47
VIDEO
WORKED
EXAMPLE 2A–4
If a 4.4 gram sample of propane is burned completely in oxygen, calculate the mass, in
grams, of carbon dioxide produced.
Solution
Logic Process
Step 1 Write a balanced equation for
the reaction.
C3H8(g) + 5O2(g) → 3CO2(g) + 4H2O(g)
Step 2 Write down the information
you have and need about the
substances.
m(C3H8) = 4.4 g
M(C3H8) = 44.0 g mol–1 M(CO2) = 44.0 g mol–1
n(C3H8) = unknown
Step 3 Determine the number of moles
of the known substance with
m
known mass using n =
M.
n(C3H8) =
m(C3H8)
M(C3H8)
= 4.4 g
44.0 g mol–1
= 0.10 mol
Step 4 Determine the stoichiometric
ratio from the equation.
From the equations, the number before
propane is 1 and CO2 is 3.
n(C3H8) : n(CO2) = 1 : 3
Step 5 Use the ratio to determine the
unknown number of moles.
n(CO2) = 3 × n(C3H8)
= 3 × 0.10 mol
= 0.30 mol
Step 6 Calculate the unknown mass of
the substance using m = n × M.
m(CO2) = n(CO2) × M(CO2)
= 0.30 × 44.0 g mol–1
= 13 g
Mass–volume stoichiometry
Mass–volume stoichiometry is similar to mass–mass stoichiometry except we are interested in
the volume of product produced from a given mass of reactant or vice versa. To calculate this
correctly, we need to determine the number of moles of the substance we are given information
for and then follow our ‘down, across, up’ process, as shown in Figure 2A–3 on page 45.
m
1 Convert the given mass to moles using n
M=
.
2 Use the mole ratio in the thermochemical equation to determine the moles the
substance of interest.
3 Convert the moles to volume using the molar volume equation.
A special condition of Avogadro’s law applies when a gas is being measured at standard
laboratory conditions (SLC). For 1 mole of a gas at SLC, there is a known volume (as
temperature and pressure are known at SLC). This means the molar volume at SLC is
24.8 L mol–1. Based on this, Avogadro’s law for measuring volume change becomes
V
n
=
Vm
where:
n = The moles of the gas
V = The volume of gas (in L)
Vm = The molar volume at SLC (in L mol–1).
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
Molar volume
a measure of
how much
product is
formed in
a reaction,
which can be
calculated
quantitatively
Standard
laboratory
conditions
refers to the
standard
laboratory
conditions (SLC)
of 25°C and
100 kPa, as
specified by the
International
Union of Pure
and Applied
Chemistry
(IUPAC)
48 CHAPTER 2 MEASURING CHANGES IN CHEMICAL REACTIONS
This is still making use of the techniques learned earlier but with a specific strategy for
mass–volume questions. We see this in action in Worked example 2A–5.
VIDEO
WORKED
EXAMPLE 2A–5
Worked example 2A–5: Calculating the mass of a product in combustion
using the molar volume at SLC
What mass of water is produced when 20.0 mL of butane is completely combusted in
oxygen under standard laboratory conditions?
Solution
Logic Process
Step 1 Write a balanced equation for
the reaction.
2C4H10(g) + 13O2(g) → 8CO2(g) + 10H2O(l)
Step 2 Write down the information
you have and need about the
substances.
V(C4H10) = 0.0200 L
Molar volume at SLC (VM) = 24.8 L mol–1
n(C4H10) = unknown
Step 3 Determine the number of moles
of the substance with known
volume using the molar volume
at SLC.
n(C4H10) =
V(C4H10)
VM
0.0200 L
=
24.8 L mol–1
= 8.06 × 10–4 mol
Step 4 Determine the stoichiometric
ratio from the equation.
From the equation, the number before
butane is 2 and the number before water
is 10.
n(C4H10) : n(H2O) = 2 : 10 = 1 : 5
Step 5 Use the ratio to determine the
unknown number of moles of
the substance.
n(H2O) = 5 × n(C4H10)
= 5 × 8.06 × 10–4 mol
= 4.03 × 10–3 mol
Step 6 Calculate the unknown mass
using m = n × M
m(H2O) = n(H2O) × M(H2O)
= 4.03 × 10–3 mol × 18 g mol–1
= 0.0726 g
5A WHAT
CAUSES A
CHEMICAL
REACTION?
LINK
Volume–volume stoichiometry
Volume–volume stoichiometry is similar to mass–mass stoichiometry and mass–volume
stoichiometry except we’re interested in the volume of a gaseous product from a given
volume of gaseous reactant or vice versa. If the following conditions are met, we can skip
some steps in the overall process.
1 The system is a closed system. A closed system is one in which energy can be transferred
between the reaction and the surroundings, but matter cannot. This is discussed further
in Section 5A.
2 The pressure is kept constant.
3 The temperature is kept constant.
If these conditions are met, then the ratio of gas volumes is identical to the mole ratios and
the coefficients in the reaction equation also apply for volume. For example, consider the
following equation:
CH4(g) + 2O2(g) → CO2(g) + 2H2O(g)
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
2A MEASURING GREENHOUSE GASES
49
If 100 mL of methane is combusted in a reaction container, how much CO2 will be produced?
As we have a system that meets the conditions of a volume–volume stoichiometry, we can
say that ‘one volume of methane produces one volume of CO2, and therefore, 100 mL of
methane will produce 100 mL of CO2’.
Worked example 2A–6: Calculating the volume of a product in combustion
using volume–volume stoichiometry
VIDEO
WORKED
EXAMPLE 2A–6
Methane is a common ingredient in biogas. If 4.0 L of methane is burned in excess
oxygen in a closed reactor that is kept at constant temperature, how many litres of
carbon dioxide are going to be produced?
Solution
Logic Process
Step 1 Write a balanced equation for the reaction. CH4(g) + 2O2(g) → CO2(g) + 2H2O(g)
Step 2 Check whether we have the conditions for
volume–volume stoichiometry.
Yes. Pressure is constant, temperature
is constant, all species are gaseous
and the container is sealed.
Step 3 Write the volume ratio. V (CH4) : V (CO2) = 1 : 1
Step 4 Use the ratio to determine the unknown
volume.
V (CO2)  = 1 × V (CH4) = 1 × 4.0 L
= 4.0 L
Calculations involving limiting and excess reagents
Determining whether a reactant is limiting, or in excess, was covered in Section 1C.
Here we’ll look at how this can apply to questions involving greenhouse gases.
Consider Worked example 2A–7 below. There are really two questions here:
• Which of the reagents is limiting, and therefore, which one is in excess? (This is shown
in Steps 1–4.)
• What is the mass of methane gas formed? (You need to know which is limiting to
calculate which is in excess. This is shown in Steps 5–7.)
LINK
1C EXOTHERMIC
AND
ENDOTHERMIC
REACTIONS
Worked example 2A–7: Calculating the mass of a product when there is a
limiting reactant
VIDEO
WORKED
EXAMPLE 2A–7
Determine the expected mass of methane produced in the below reaction when 25.0 g of
hydrogen gas and 100.0 g of carbon dioxide gas are mixed and reacted.
CO2(g) + 4H2(g) → CH4(g) + 2H2O(l) ∆H = –165.0 kJ mol–1
Solution
Logic Process
Step 1 Write a balanced equation for
the reaction.
CO2(g) + 4H2(g) → CH4(g) + 2H2O(l)
Step 2 Calculate the moles of both
m
reactants using n =
M.
n(CO2) =
n(H2) =
m(CO2)
M(CO2) =
m(H2)
M(H2) =
100.0 g
44.0 g mol–1 = 2.27 mol
25.0 g
2.0 g mol–1 = 12.5 mol
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
50 CHAPTER 2 MEASURING CHANGES IN CHEMICAL REACTIONS
Step 3 Write the stoichiometric ratio
and the experimental ratio of
both reactants.
Stoichiometric = 1 : 4
Experimental = 2.27 : 12.5 = 1 : 5.5
Step 4 Write which species is in
excess and which is limiting.
Carbon dioxide is limiting; hydrogen is
in excess.
Step 5 Write the stoichiometric ratio
for the limiting reactant and the
product in question.
n(CO2) : n(CH4) = 1 : 1
Step 6 Use the stoichiometric ratio
to determine the unknown
number of moles.
n(CH4) = 1 × n(CO2) = 2.27 mol
Step 7 Calculate the unknown mass
using m = n × M.
m(CH4) = n(CH4) × M(CH4)
= 2.27 mol × 16.0 g mol–1
= 36.3 g
WORKSHEET
2A–1
CALCULATING
GREENHOUSE
GAS EMISSIONS
DOC
Check-in questions – Set 2
VIDEO 2A–1
SKILLS:
IDENTIFYING
LIMITING
REAGENTS
1 Explain the process for calculating energy produced from combustion of n moles of fuel,
given that the heat of combustion of this fuel is h kJ mol–1
.
2 A car petrol tank can hold 45 L of octane at SLC. How much energy can be produced
from a full tank of fuel, assuming the fuel is 100% octane?
3 Which of the reactants in the following equations is in excess and which is limiting?
a C3H8(g) + 5O2(g) → 3CO2(g) + 4H2O(g) with 0.5 g of propane and 2.5 g of oxygen
b H2(g) + 4O2(g) → CH4(g) + 2H2O(g) with 0.2 g of oxygen and 0.4 g of hydrogen
c CH4(g) + 2O2(g) → CO2(g) + 2H2O(g) with 2.22 g of methane and 1.11 g of oxygen
4 An experiment on human cells looks at the metabolism of glucose in different
environments. If an experiment provides 3.2 g of glucose in a oxygen-limited
environment with 2 g of available oxygen, how much CO2 is produced? Which reactants
are limiting and which are in excess?
C6H12O6(s) + 6O2(g) → 6CO2(g) + 6H2O(g)
2A SKILLS
Identifying limiting reagents
In this section, you have learned more about calculations that require you to identify the limiting reagent
in combustion reactions. As described in the text, this involves calculating the number of moles of each
reactant and applying stoichiometric ratios to determine which is in excess and which is limiting.
When the stoichiometric ratio is 1 : 1, this is a relatively simple process whereby the reagent with the lowest
number of moles is limiting. However, it can become trickier when other stoichiometric ratios are involved.
To help with that, there are many tips and strategies that people employ to make sure they solve the
problem correctly. It is important that you find a method that makes sense and works well for you, but we
will describe one below that you may find useful. It can be summarised as follows.
Strategy: Once you have calculated the number of moles of each reactant, divide that value by the
stoichiometric coefficient from the equation. Whichever number is lower after you do this will correspond
to the limiting reagent.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
2A MEASURING GREENHOUSE GASES
51
To understand this better, let’s look at an example. In this instance, we won’t go through the process of
calculating the number of moles, we will just provide them in the question.
Question: The combustion of ethane can be represented by the following balanced equation:
2C2H6(g) + 7O2(g) → 4CO2(g) +6H2O(g)
If 0.5 moles of ethane reacts with 2.1 moles of oxygen, which is the limiting reagent?
Solution: Using the strategy that we have above, we can set out our calculation as follows.
C2H6 O2
Number of moles (n) 0.5 2.1
Stoichiometric coefficient 2 7
0.5
2 = 0.25 2.1
7 = 0.3
Therefore, C2H6 is the limiting reagent as it has the lowest value after dividing the number of moles by the
stoichiometric coefficient.
Go back over some practice questions that you have done involving a limiting reagent and use this method
to see if it helps.
Section 2A questions
1 Calculate the heat energy produced from each of the following combustion reactions.
a 32 g of methanol
b 126 mL of hydrogen gas
c a petrol composed of 91% octane and 9% butane
2 Explain the difference between mass–mass, mass–volume and volume–volume
calculations for determining the amount of products produced from reactants.
3 Water is a common by-product of combustion reactions. For a 5.8 g sample of butane,
how much water vapour will be produced at SLC?
4 When butane is burned in air, water vapour and carbon dioxide are produced. Balance
the equation and state the stoichiometric ratio for butane and water vapour.
5 Draw a diagram that shows the method for obtaining the unknown mass of a substance
from the known mass of a second substance.
6 Daryl loves barbecuing and wants to get the most value for money.
a Daryl is worried about the water by-product from his butane four-burner barbecue. If
he plans to completely burn 25 kg of butane, how much water vapour will he produce?
b Daryl has a new barbecue that uses propane, which advertises ‘less food spoilage due
to water vapour compared to butane’. If he plans to completely burn 25 kg of propane
at SLC, how much water vapour will he produce, in mL? Is this better than butane?
c Daryl has figured it out now and will only be using gas fuels from now on, so he
purchases a new barbecue that uses methane in the annual sale at his camping store.
If he plans to empty a 25 kg tank of methane that completely combusts (which is
advertised as 18 L of methane at SLC), how much water vapour will he produce, in mL?
d Is this the best barbecue of the three used?
7 A 62.0 g sample of propane is ignited in 100 L of oxygen. The gas volume is measured at SLC.
Calculate the volume of carbon dioxide produced, in L, if the equation for the reaction is:
C3H8(g) + 5O2(g) → 3CO2(g) + 4H2O(l)
Also note which species is in excess and which is limiting.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
52 CHAPTER 2 MEASURING CHANGES IN CHEMICAL REACTIONS
2B Measuring energy released from
chemical reactions
Study Design:
•
the use of the specific heat capacity of water to
approximate the quantity of heat energy released during
the combustion of a known mass of fuel and food
•
the principles of solution calorimetry, including
determination of the calibration factor and consideration
of the effects of heat loss; analysis of temperature–time
graphs obtained from solution calorimetry
•
energy from fuels and food:
– calculation of energy transformation efficiency
during combustion as a percentage of chemical
energy converted to useful energy
– comparison and calculations of energy values of foods
containing carbohydrates, proteins and fats and oils
Glossary:
Calorimetry
Line of best fit
Solution calorimeter
Specific heat
capacity
Specific heat
capacity
the amount of
energy required
to raise the
temperature of one
gram of a substance
by one degree
Celsius; symbol c
ENGAGE
Guinea pigs: nature’s calorimeter?
In 1789, Antione Lavoisier conducted a series of experiments
on guinea pigs. These are not the experiments for which he
was famed and which led to the discovery of the principle of
conservation of mass but, equally, they’re not far off. Lavoisier
was able to measure the heat of respiration by guinea pigs
and, in doing so, also invented the world’s first calorimeter,
a device for detecting the energy change in a chemical
reaction. He did this by placing the guinea pigs in a small ice
calorimeter (a container inside another container that’s filled
with ice) and measured how much ice was melted. He then
used this to determine the amount of energy produced by
the guinea pigs and their rate of respiration. Therefore, the
guinea pigs themselves were not the calorimeter, but they
were useful test subjects in determining the energy produced
when animals undergo respiration.
Figure 2B–1 A schematic
diagram of the calorimeter,
with a guinea pig inside,
used by Lavoisier for his
experiments on respiration
1C EXOTHERMIC
AND
ENDOTHERMIC
REACTIONS
2A MEASURING
GREENHOUSE
GASES
UNIT 2
LINK
LINK
EXPLAIN
Measuring energy from fuels
In Section 1C and Section 2A, we discussed the release of energy from the combustion
reaction of fuels using thermochemical equations. However, what hasn’t yet been discussed
is how these energy values are calculated. To do this experimentally, it is useful to be able
to utilise a material known for its energy storage properties – water. Water is excellent for
measuring energy changes as it has a uniquely high specific heat capacity. We remember
from Unit 2 that the specific heat capacity of a material is the energy required to raise the
temperature of one gram of a given substance by one degree Celsius.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
2B MEASURING ENERGy RELEASED FROM CHEMICAL REACTIONS
53
Table 2B–1 Specific heat capacities of some common materials
Material Specific heat (J g–1°C–1)
Liquid water 4.18
Solid water (ice) 2.11
Gaseous water (steam) 2.00
Air (dry) 1.01
Basalt 0.84
Granite 0.79
Iron 0.45
Copper 0.38
Lead 0.13
As Table 2B–1 shows, liquid water stands out in its ability to store energy with little change
in temperature.
From this, we can understand that a relatively large quantity of energy is required to raise
the temperature of water, but how does that help us determine the actual quantity of energy
released from the combustion of fuels? The answer lies in the use of the following formula,
which links together energy (q) with the specific heat capacity (c):
q = mcΔT
where:
q = The energy produced or used in joules
c = The specific heat capacity in J g–1°C–1
m = The mass of the substance in grams
∆T = The change in temperature in degrees Celsius.
Worked example 2B–1: Calculating heat energy using q = mcΔT
VIDEO
WORKED
EXAMPLE 2B–1
Determine how much heat energy is required to raise the temperature of 100 grams of
water by 10 degrees Celsius.
Solution
Logic Process
Step 1 Write down everything you have and
need, ensuring to convert units where
appropriate.
m(H2O) = 100 g
∆T = 10°C
c(H2O) = 4.18 J g–1°C–1
q = ?
Step 2 Write down the relevant equation. q = mcΔT
Step 3 Substitute and solve. q = mcΔT
= 100 g × 4.18 J g–1°C–1 × 10°C
= 4180 J
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
54 CHAPTER 2 MEASURING CHANGES IN CHEMICAL REACTIONS
Calorimetry
an experimental
method by which
the heat energy
of food or a fuel
is measured
Calorimetry
To measure the quantity of energy released or absorbed in a chemical reaction, we use a
technique called calorimetry. The analytical equipment used to perform calorimetry is the
calorimeter. All calorimeters have the same goals in their design:
• isolate the reaction taking place
• have well insulated walls
• have a reference material to reduce the effects of imperfect isolation
• use stirrers to ensure that temperatures measured are even
• use thermometers to measure the temperature in the calorimeter
• have negligible heat capacity (or a known accurate heat capacity), so the loss of heat in
heating the calorimeter can be taken into account.
One such technique, which can be used to measure the energy contained within food or
fuel, is known as simple calorimetry. The experimental set-up for simple calorimetry is
shown in Figure 2B–2.
Thermometer
Metal can
Water
Spirit burner
Fuel
Figure 2B–2 A simple calorimetry set-up like this can be used for measuring
the quantity of energy released or absorbed in a chemical reaction.
In these experiments, the fuel or food is burned (or combusted) above a spirit burner that
is positioned beneath a container filled with water. As the fuel or food is burned, energy is
released. The energy that is released will gradually heat the water in the container. Using
the equation, q = mcΔT, above, the change in temperature can be used to calculate the
quantity of energy that is released from the fuel source.
The basic experimental procedure for this follows these steps:
1 Accurately measure and record the mass of water added to the metal can.
2 Record the initial temperature of the water.
3 Weigh your fuel source and place into the spirit burner.
4 Light the spirit burner.
5 Using the thermometer, record the change in temperature of the water over time.
6 Stop heating the water before all the fuel has been used and well before the water boils.
To help understand how this can be used to measure energy, let’s consider Worked
example 2B–2.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
2B MEASURING ENERGy RELEASED FROM CHEMICAL REACTIONS
55
Worked example 2B–2: Measuring energy from the combustion of a fuel
VIDEO
WORKED
EXAMPLE 2B–2
A 13.5 g sample of octane is burned below 50.0 g of water contained in a copper
container. The water temperature changed from 20.2°C to 22.8°C. How much energy,
in joules, was released from the octane?
Solution
Logic Process
Step 1 Write down everything you have and
need, ensuring to convert units where
appropriate.
Have:
m(H2O) = 50.0 g
c(H2O) = 4.18 J g–1°C–1
∆T = 22.8°C – 20.2°C = 2.60°C
Step 2 Write down the specific heat equation
and rearrange if required.
q = mcΔT
Step 3 Substitute and solve. q = mcΔT
= 50.0 g × 4.18 J g–1°C–1 × 2.60°C
= 543 J
Solution calorimetry
Solution calorimeters measure the enthalpies associated with reactions that occur in
solution, including heat of precipitation, heat of solution and heat of neutralisation.
These reactions can be endothermic or exothermic. The container is thermally insulated,
preventing heat loss to the surroundings. Gas samples can be measured through solution
calorimetry using an ampoule. Ampoules are small (typically glass) sealed containers that
are used to preserve samples but can be broken open to release their sample safely.
Solution
calorimeter
an instrument
used to measure
the heat
absorbed or
released during
a chemical
reaction,
dissolution or
neutralisation
occurring in a
liquid solution
Thermometer
Stirrer
Thermally insulated cover
Thermally insulated seal
Reaction mixture
Insulated container
Figure 2B–3 A solution calorimeter, sometimes referred to as a ‘coffee cup’ calorimeter, showing the
internal structures that allow for the measurement of heat of reactions in solution
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
56 CHAPTER 2 MEASURING CHANGES IN CHEMICAL REACTIONS
VIDEO
WORKED
EXAMPLE 2B–3
Worked example 2B–3: Calculating the molar heat of solution using
a solution calorimeter
A student wants to determine the heat of mixing methane gas through an experiment.
They place an ampoule containing 3.00 × 10–3 moles of methane gas in a solution
calorimeter of 100 g of distilled water at 20.00°C. After breaking the ampoule and
releasing the methane, the solution reached a maximum temperature of 22.00°C.
Calculate the molar heat of solution for the dissolution CH4(g) → CH4(aq).
Solution
Logic Process
Step 1 Write down everything you
have and need, ensuring
to convert units where
appropriate.
Have:
n(CH4) = 3.00 × 10–3 mol
M(CH4) = 16 g mol–1
∆T = 22 – 20 = 2.00°C
m(water) = 100 g
c(water) = 4.18 J g–1°C–1
Need to find q in kilojoules to solve for
∆H(CH4).
Step 2 Write down the specific heat
equation and rearrange if
required.
q = mcΔT
Step 3 Substitute and solve. q = mcΔT
= 100 × 4.18 × 2
= 836 J
= 0.84 kJ
ΔH = q
n
0.84
=
0.003
= 278.67 kJ mol–1
WORKSHEET
2B–1
CALCULATIONS
USING q = mcΔT
Energy transformation efficiency
DOC
As the experimental set-up on page 54 suggests, the fuel in the spirit burner is undergoing
combustion and the heat energy produced is being used to heat the water. However,
this process is not 100% efficient. There are several reasons that can contribute to a
reduced efficiency, such as heat being lost to the surrounding environment or incomplete
combustion. By calculating the thermal energy absorbed by the water, as described in the
examples above and on page 55, and then comparing this to the known theoretical enthalpy
of combustion of the fuel being used, it is possible to calculate the energy transformation
efficiency. This is highlighted through Worked example 2B–4.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al © Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
2B MEASURING ENERGy RELEASED FROM CHEMICAL REACTIONS
57
Worked example 2B–4: Calculating the percentage energy transformation
efficiency
VIDEO
WORKED
EXAMPLE 2B–4
A 1.50 g sample of ethanol is combusted in a spirit burner, which is placed underneath
a can containing 100.0 g of water. The water changed temperature from 20.2°C to
57.4°C. What is the percentage efficiency of this process?
Solution
Logic Process
Step 1 Write down all relevant
information from the question.
m(H2O) = 100.0 g
c(H2O) = 4.18 J g–1°C–1
ΔT = 57.4°C – 20.2°C = 37.2°C
m(C2H5OH) = 1.5 g
Step 2 Calculate the energy used to
heat the water, using q = mc∆T.
q = mcΔT
q = 100.0 g × 4.18 J g–1°C–1 × 37.2°C
q = 15549.6 J = 15.5 kJ
Step 3 Calculate the theoretical
maximum energy released by
the ethanol using the VCAA
Data Book.
m(C2H5OH) = 1.5 g
ΔH°c (C2H5OH) = 29.6 kJ g–1
ΔH(C2H5OH) = 1.5 g × 29.6 kJ g–1
= 44.4 kJ
Step 4 Calculate the percentage
efficiency using % efficiency =
experimental value
theoretical value × 100
% efficiency = 15.5 kJ
44.4 kJ × 100
= 34.9%
Calibrating a calorimeter
To help reduce systematic errors, calibration of the apparatus is performed before each
experiment.
This can be done by either using a known chemical reference material such as a metal or a
well-studied compound like potassium chloride, or by using an electric heating element as a
known provider of energy based on the power supply.
Chemical calibration
Chemicals with well-characterised enthalpies of dissolution are often used as reference
materials for solution calorimetry. Potassium chloride is a common reference material, as it is
solid at room temperature and has a well-characterised enthalpy of dissolution of 17.2 kJ mol–1
.
For calibration to occur, a known amount of potassium chloride is placed
in the calorimeter and dissolved. The temperature change is recorded. We
then use two equations to determine the calibration factor:
E = n × ΔH
c
Calibration factor = E
ΔT
where:
E = The energy released in kilojoules
n = The number of moles of reference material
ΔHC =  The heat of combustion for the reference material
ΔT = The change in temperature recorded.
Calibration factor may also be written as CF.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
Figure 2B–4 Potassium chloride is
a common staple of laboratories that
conduct a lot of solution calorimetry
experiments as it is a widely available,
cheap and well-studied compound.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
58 CHAPTER 2 MEASURING CHANGES IN CHEMICAL REACTIONS
VIDEO
WORKED
EXAMPLE 2B–5
Worked example 2B–5: Calculating the calibration factor of a solution
calorimeter by chemical calibration
A 1.00 g sample of potassium nitrate (M(KNO3) = 101.1 g mol–1) was dissolved in a
solution calorimeter containing water with an initial temperature of 20.06°C. Once
the potassium nitrate was completely dissolved, a final temperature of 18.05°C was
recorded. Potassium nitrate dissolves in water according to the following equation:
KNO3(s) → K+(aq) + NO3
–(aq) ΔH = +34.9 kJ mol–1
Determine the calibration factor of the calorimeter in J°C–1
.
Solution
Logic Process
Step 1 Write down everything you have
and need, ensuring to convert
units where appropriate.
Have:
m(KNO3) = 1.00 g
M(KNO3) = 101.1 g mol–1
ΔH(NO3) = +34.9 kJ mol–1
= +34 900 J mol–1
Tinitial = 20.06°C
Tfinal = 18.05°C
Need n to find calibration factor.
Step 2 Write down the calibration
equations and rearrange, if
required.
E = n × ΔH
CF = E
ΔT =
n × ΔH
ΔT
Step 3 Substitute and solve. n =
m
2.00
M =
101.1 = 0.0099 mol
CF = n × ΔH
ΔT
0.0099 × 34900
=
2.01
= 172 J°C–1
Electrical calibration
Calorimeters can also be calibrated electrically, as the heating element that heats the
solution has a constant power supply from the socket. This means that you can link
the energy produced by the element to a change in temperature of the water within the
calorimeter. The energy produced from electricity passing through the heating element is
calculated from the following equation:
E = V × I × t
where:
E = The energy produced in joules
V = The voltage in volts
I = The current in amperes
t = The time in seconds.
This allows us to combine equations as we did in the chemical calibration method:
Calibration factor = E
VIt
∆T =
∆T
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
2B MEASURING ENERGy RELEASED FROM CHEMICAL REACTIONS
59
Worked example 2B–6: Calculating the calibration factor of a solution
calorimeter by electrical calibration
VIDEO
WORKED
EXAMPLE 2B–6
A solution calorimeter was calibrated by passing a current of 2.25 A through an electric
heating element for 45.75 s. The potential difference was 5.25 V, and the temperature of
the water in the calorimeter increased from 20.25°C to 21.89°C. Using this information,
calculate the calibration factor of the calorimeter.
Solution
Logic Process
Step 1 Write down everything you have and
need, ensuring to convert units where
appropriate.
Have:
I = 2.25 A
t = 45.75 s
V = 5.25 V
Tinitial = 20.25°C
Tfinal = 21.89°C
Need to find calibration factor.
Step 2 Write down the calibration equations
and rearrange if required.
E = V × I × t
CF = E
ΔT =
V × I × T
ΔT
Step 3 Substitute and solve. V × I × T
CF = E
ΔT =
=
1.64
= 330 J°C–1
ΔT
5.25 × 2.25 × 45.75
Check-in questions – Set 1
1. A solution calorimeter was calibrated by passing 1.50 A through the electric heater for
90 s at a potential difference of 6.50 V. The temperature of the water in the calorimeter
was initially 18.00°C and rose to 20.50°C during the calibration. Determine the
calibration factor of the calorimeter.
This method is commonly used for solution calorimeters and data can be acquired
graphically to determine ∆T for the experiment either by direct reading or via extrapolation
back to the point where a current was applied using a line of best fit. Both methods are
shown in Figure 2B–5 on the following page.
Line of best fit
a line on a graph
that shows the
general trend of
the data points;
the distance
to the points
above the line
should equal
the distance
to the points
below the line
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
60 CHAPTER 2 MEASURING CHANGES IN CHEMICAL REACTIONS
A
Instant current
turned off
Temperature (°C)
25.0
24.0
23.0
22.0
21.0
20.0
19.0
18.0
17.0
16.0
15.0
Instant current
turned on
∆T
∆T = Tfinal – Tinitial
= 22.0 – 18.0
= 4.0ºC
30 60 90 120 150 180 210 240 270 300 330 360 390 420 450 480
Time (s)
B
Temperature (°C)
Instant current
turned off
25.0
24.0
23.0
22.0
21.0
20.0
19.0
18.0
17.0
16.0
15.0
∆T
Line of best fit
∆T = Tfinal – Tinitial
= 23.0 – 18.0
Instant current
turned on
= 5.0ºC
30 60 90 120 150 180 210 240 270 300 330 360 390 420 450 480
Time (s)
Figure 2B–5 These graphs show the results of two experiments to determine the calibration factor by
electrical methods. The current is turned on at 60 seconds and turned off at 360 seconds. In graph A,
the change in temperature can be read accurately; however, in graph B an extrapolation back to the
point where the current was turned on is required via a line of best fit.
If you know the calibration factor for a calorimeter, the results for energy changes you
produce will be more accurate. This allows us to put together a complete procedure for
using a calorimeter and getting the best possible results with minimal experimental error.
Overall experimental process
Earlier in the chapter, we looked at calculating the energy produced from combustion reactions
using simple calorimeters and from other types of reactions using solution calorimetry.
However, as we’ve just seen, we also need to ensure the calorimeter is calibrated before making
the measurement. This means our overall process for performing a calorimetric measurement
to determine the enthalpy change of a reaction should be as follows:
1 Calibrate your calorimeter using the most appropriate method.
2 Perform your experiment.
3 Interpret your data.
4 Perform your calculations to determine the calibration factor, CF.
5 Use the calibration factor to determine ∆H.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
2B MEASURING ENERGy RELEASED FROM CHEMICAL REACTIONS
61
Worked example 2B–7: Calculating the energy released by a reaction using
the calibration factor
VIDEO
WORKED
EXAMPLE 2B–7
A solution calorimeter containing 150.0 mL of distilled water at 25.00°C is calibrated
electrically by applying a potential difference of 4.00 V of electricity and a current of
2.00 A passed through the electric heater for 60.0 seconds, causing the temperature to
increase to 26.50°C. The distilled water was then removed and replaced with 75.0 mL
of 0.150 M hydrochloric acid and 75.0 mL of 0.100 M sodium hydroxide, which were
both at an initial temperature of 22.0°C. The temperature of the solution increased to
23.23°C. Calculate the energy released, in kJ, by the neutralisation reaction between
hydrochloric acid and sodium hydroxide.
Solution
Logic Process
Step 1 Write down everything you
have and need, ensuring
to convert units where
appropriate.
Calibration data:
I = 2.00 A
V = 4.00 V
t = 60.0 s
Tinitial = 25.00°C
Tfinal = 26.50°C
Neutralisation reaction data:
n(NaOH) = 0.0075 mol (limiting reagent)
Tinitial = 22.00°C
Tfinal = 23.23°C
Need calibration factor to determine ∆H.
Step 2 Write down the calibration
equations and rearrange if
required.
E = V × I × t
CF = E
ΔT
V × I × T
=
ΔT
E = n × ∆H
CF = E
ΔT
n × ∆T
=
ΔT
Step 3 Calculate the calibration
factor. CF = E
ΔT
V × I × T
=
ΔT
4.00 V × 2.00 A × 60.0 s
=
1.5°C
= 320 J°C–1
Step 4 Calculate the energy released
by the neutralisation reaction
using the calibration factor.
E
 = CF × ∆T
= 320 J°C–1 × 1.23°C
= 393.6 J
Step 5 Calculate the molar heat of
solution. ∆H =
=
E
n
393.6 J
0.0075 mol
= 52.5 kJ mol–1
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
62 CHAPTER 2 MEASURING CHANGES IN CHEMICAL REACTIONS
WORKSHEET
2B–2
CALIBRATING
CALORIMETERS
VIDEO 2B–1
SKILLS: RANDOM
VERSUS
SYSTEMATIC
ERRORS
DOC
2B SKILLS
Random versus systematic errors
In the context of chemistry, particularly in an experiment such as calorimetry, two types
of errors commonly occur: random and systematic.
Random errors occur unpredictably and differ in each measurement. They’re caused
by unpredictable fluctuations in the experimental process, such as variations in
temperature, slight inconsistencies in material, or even human error during observation.
In a calorimetry experiment, a random error could be the minor fluctuation in the
temperature readings of the calorimeter. While these errors can’t be completely
eliminated, they can be minimised by conducting multiple trials and calculating an
average result.
On the other hand, systematic errors are predictable and consistent in each
measurement. They’re caused by faulty equipment, incorrect calibration or bias in
the method of measurement. For instance, if the calorimeter isn’t perfectly insulated,
heat may escape or enter, leading to a consistent underestimation or overestimation of
energy changes in the system, respectively. This is a systematic error. Systematic errors
can be identified because they skew results in a particular direction and their effect
remains consistent irrespective of the number of trials. To eliminate systematic errors,
equipment should be properly calibrated, and methods should be evaluated and adjusted
if necessary.
The difference between these two types of errors can be demonstrated visually, as shown
below.
Systematic error
Actual value
Random error
Therefore, while both random and systematic errors affect the accuracy of experimental
results, they have different sources and strategies for minimisation or elimination. The
identification and understanding of these errors are key to improving the reliability and
validity of experimental outcomes.
We can also look at these through a question, in which you might be asked to identify
the type of error that has occurred.
Question: During a calorimetry experiment to determine the energy released from the
combustion of a fuel, the recorded temperature change is consistently lower than the
expected value. Is this error likely to be random or systematic? Provide some potential
sources of the error.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
2B MEASURING ENERGy RELEASED FROM CHEMICAL REACTIONS
63
Answer: The consistently lower temperature change observed in the calorimetry
experiment suggests that the error is likely to be systematic rather than random.
Systematic errors are characterised by consistent deviations in the same direction and
magnitude. In this case, the lower recorded temperature change indicates a systematic bias
that may be attributed to a flaw in the experimental set-up or procedure. It is important
to carefully examine factors such as insulation, calorimeter calibration, heat loss and
combustion efficiency to identify and rectify the source of this systematic error. By
addressing the underlying issue causing the consistent deviation, scientists can improve
the accuracy and reliability of the results obtained from the calorimetry experiment.
Section 2B questions
1 In a calorimetry experiment, the combustion of a small piece of chocolate-chip cookie
released 1260 J of energy, which was used to heat a quantity of water in a can. If the
temperature of this water increased by 3.25°C, determine the mass of water in the can.
2 Explain the following observations in terms of specific heat capacity.
a Running water over a burn quickly helps reduce the burning feeling.
b Copper heats up much quicker than wood on a hot day.
c A quantity of 10 J of heat energy causes a larger temperature shift in 1 g of water
vapour and 1 g of solid water compared with 1 g of liquid water.
3 Solve the following problems using the values for specific heat capacity from Table 2B–1
on page 53 where required.
a the heat energy required to increase the temperature of 2.66 g of solid water from
–6.2°C to –1.1°C
b the temperature change in a 3.32 g piece of copper wire that absorbs 423 J
of energy
c the mass of basalt rock required to absorb 330 kJ of energy while only allowing a
temperature shift from 15.16°C to 18.77°C
d the specific heat capacity of liquid benzene, if 3 g of benzene increases from 13.13°C
to 17.22°C with 1.63 kilojoules of energy
4 Calorimetry is the analytical technique that allows us to measure the heat released in a
chemical reaction.
a What are the two common types of calorimetry and how do they differ structurally?
b What are the key requirements for a calorimeter to work effectively?
c Give two experimental errors that could indicate a calorimeter is not set up properly
and the cause.
5 Give a possible cause for each of the following experimental observations in an
experiment using a calorimeter.
a The temperature does not change during a reaction between butane and oxygen.
b The temperature is not constant from the start to the end of the experiment.
c The temperature increases sharply then starts to gradually decline.
6 An electric heating coil was placed in a solution calorimeter containing 150 mL
of water. A current of 2.50 amps with a potential difference of 13 volts was applied
to the heating coil for a period of 90 seconds. A temperature increase of 3.4°C was
recorded.
After calibration, 10.3 g of sodium chloride was added to the calorimeter and the
temperature was observed to decrease by 0.80°C.
a Calculate the calibration factor of the calorimeter.
b Calculate the heat of solution of sodium chloride.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
64 CHAPTER 2 MEASURING CHANGES IN CHEMICAL REACTIONS
7 Consider the following reaction involving ammonium chloride:
NH4Cl(s) → NH4Cl(aq)
When completed, a final temperature of 24.91°C is reached.
Calculate the molar heat of solution, ΔH, in kJ mol–1 if 100 mL of distilled water at
25.00°C is used in a solution calorimeter and 133.75 g of ammonium chloride is dissolved.
8 A student performed an experiment to determine the enthalpy change of the following
reaction:
CaO(s) + H2O(l) → Ca(OH)2(s)
The student placed 100 mL of water at an initial temperature of 25°C in a solution
calorimeter. The calorimeter was calibrated using a known amount of heat and
determined to have a calibration factor of 85 J°C–1. The student added 0.90 grams of
CaO powder to the calorimeter, causing the temperature to rise to 36.6°C. Calculate
the enthalpy change of the reaction.
9 A 0.10 g piece of magnesium ribbon is placed in a solution calorimeter. A quantity of
100 mL of a 0.5 M HCl solution is added with an initial temperature of 18.32°C. The
following reaction occurs:
Mg(s) + 2HCl(aq) → H2(g) + MgCl2(aq)
Once completed, the final temperature of water is 22.87°C. Calculate the enthalpy
change for the reaction. Assume that the specific heat capacity and density of the dilute
solution are the same as pure water.
10 A 1.57 g sample of ammonium nitrate (M(NH4NO3) = 80.04 g mol–1) is dissolved in
100 mL of water in a calorimeter. The temperature of the calorimeter is observed to
increase by 15.7°C. The enthalpy of solution of ammonium nitrate is 25.7 kJ mol–1
.
a Determine the calibration factor of the calorimeter in J°C–1
.
b Another student uses the calorimeter but calibrates it using potassium nitrate. They
get a calibration factor of 27.2 J°C–1. Explain a possible source of error that has led to
two different calibration factor values.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
2C MEASURING ENERGy FROM FOOD
65
Measuring energy from food
2C
Study Design:
•
energy from fuels and food:
•
calculation of energy transformation efficiency during combustion as a
percentage of chemical energy converted to useful energy
•
comparison and calculations of energy values of foods containing carbohydrates,
proteins and fats and oils
ENGAGE
Energy: It’s all in a label
When we think of food packaging, we usually think of brands, logos and advertisements.
However, did you know that food packaging has a major legal responsibility to provide
consumers with the information available to them around the energy provided in
a food? Not only do labels provide us with a list of ingredients, they also provide us
with the energy content information of the product. This allows us to make informed
choices about the nutritional value of food, as well as the way the energy in food is being
provided. This is because different food types provide energy differently, depending on
the make-up of proteins, fats and carbohydrates within the food.
Figure 2C–1 A medium cheeseburger meal (left) provides 3515 kJ of energy, whereas a regular
Acai bowl (right) provides 1760 kJ.
EXPLAIN
Food: a biochemical energy source
While we often think of food in terms of taste, our body views food as energy. When
digested, the main food groups are broken down into smaller molecules that can be
used directly as a source of energy or stored for later use. While we do also use food for
structural components associated with growth, repair and daily function, food still comes
down to the balance between energy taken in and energy used in the activities of daily life.
The main nutrients are carbohydrates, fats and proteins. As all of these groups are
comprised of a mixture of different substances (for example, proteins refers to a number
of different proteins, not a ‘pure’ protein), we measure energy value in food in kJ g–1, not
kJ mol–1 as we did with energy from reactions in the previous section. Equally, just because
a nutrient has a certain energy content doesn’t mean that the energy can be fully extracted
from that food. This is shown in Table 2C–1.
LINK
2B MEASURING
ENERGY
RELEASED FROM
CHEMICAL
REACTIONS
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
66 CHAPTER 2 MEASURING CHANGES IN CHEMICAL REACTIONS
Table 2C–1 The heat of combustion of
different food groups
Nutrient Heat of
combustion (kJ g–1)
Fats and oils 37
Proteins 17
Carbohydrates 16
The heat of combustion assumes we are completely burning the
nutrient in an environment containing excess oxygen. The energy
value, however, can be less than expected and can be due to factors
such as the following:
• Cellulose can be combusted to release energy, but the human
body can’t metabolise or digest it.
• Nutrients move through the digestive system too fast for all of the
carbohydrates, fats and proteins to be absorbed.
These factors help us understand why sugars are excellent for quick energy, whereas
proteins are used for energy only when other sources are not readily available.
Table 2C–2 The composition of common foods
We also need to remember that foods
themselves are mixtures of these different
nutrients and as such offer us different energy
amounts in different ways. This is illustrated
with different examples in Table 2C–2. One
thing that you may notice about this table is
that the values don’t add up to 100%. This is
because there are other substances in the food
that don’t contribute to the energy content
(such as water and cellulose), which have been omitted.
We can then combine the information contained within Table 2C–1 and Table 2C–2 to
provide an estimation for the overall energy content of food. The process for doing this is
explained in Worked example 2C–1.
Food % Protein % Fats/Oils % Carbohydrates
Peanuts 26 49 16
Bread 9.0 4.0 49
Bananas 1.1 0.3 23
Lettuce 1.4 0.2 2.9
Ice cream 1.7 6.5 29
VIDEO
WORKED
EXAMPLE 2C–1
Worked example 2C–1: Calculating the overall energy content of food
The nutritional information on a bag of unsalted almonds states that they consist of
21.0% water, 21.0% carbohydrates, 6.0% protein and 52.0% fat. Given that water provides
no energy, determine the energy value of a 100 g bag of unsalted almonds, in kJ g–1
.
Solution
Logic Process
Step 1 Refer to tables to determine the
available energy for the nutrients
in the nuts.
Fats = 37 kJ g–1
Proteins = 17 kJ g–1
Carbohydrates = 16 kJ g–1
Step 2 Convert the percentages to
a mass assuming 100 g is
equivalent to 100% and multiply
by energy availability.
Fats = 37 kJ g–1 × 52.0 g
= 1924 kJ
Proteins = 17 kJ g–1 × 6.0 g
= 102 kJ
Carbohydrates = 16 kJ g–1 × 21.0 g
= 336 kJ
Step 3 Add all available energy. Total energy = 1924 kJ + 102 kJ + 336 kJ
= 2362 kJ
Step 4 Divide by the mass of the
sample to get units of energy
value, kJ g–1
.
Energy value = 2383 kJ
100 g
= 23.62 kJ g–1
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
2C MEASURING ENERGy FROM FOOD
67
Check-in questions – Set 1
1 The nutritional information on a bag of plain salted chips states that they consist of
10.0% water, 11.0% carbohydrates, 2.0% protein and 77.0% fat. Given that water provides
no energy, determine the energy value of a 100 g bag of chips, in kJ g–1
.
Food and calorimetry
Just like fuels, the energy contained within food can be determined by calorimetry. From
these measurements we can arrive at an overall estimate for the energy content of food.
Worked example 2C–2: Calculating the energy content of a specific food
VIDEO
WORKED
EXAMPLE 2C–2
A potato chip weighing 0.150 g was partially burned under a metal can containing 150 g
of water. By the end of the experiment, the temperature of the water had increased by
22.5°C, and the remaining mass of the potato chip was 0.030 g. Calculate the energy
value of the potato chip in kJ g–1
.
Solution
Logic Process
Step 1 Calculate the heat transferred to the
water from the burning potato chip
using q = mc∆T.
q = mc∆T
q = 150 g × 4.18 J g–1°C–1 × 22.5°C
= 14 107.5 J
Step 2 Convert the energy into kilojoules. 14 107.5 J = 14.11 kJ
Step 3 Calculate the mass of food burned. Total mass burned = minitial – mfinal
= 0.15 g – 0.03 g
= 0.12 g
Step 4 Calculate the energy value by
dividing the energy calculated in
step 2 by the mass from step 3.
Energy value = 14.11
0.12
= 120 kJ g–1
Check-in questions – Set 2
DOC
VIDEO 2C–1
MEASURING
ENERGY FROM
FOOD
WORKSHEET
2C–1
CALCULATING
ENERGY FROM
FOOD
1 A 1.340 g chocolate-chip biscuit was burned under a simple calorimeter. By the end
of the experiment, the temperature of the water had increased by 3.85°C, and the
remaining mass of the burned biscuit was considered negligible. Calculate the energy
value of the biscuit in kJ g–1
.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
68 CHAPTER 2 MEASURING CHANGES IN CHEMICAL REACTIONS
VIDEO 2C–2
SKILLS:
SIGNIFICANT
FIGURES
2C SKILLS
Significant figures
At the end of any calculation question in chemistry, you should check two things: units
and significant figures. It is frustrating to have done your working out correctly and
obtained the right value, only to lose marks because you haven’t included (or have used
the wrong) units or written your answer to the correct number of significant figures.
Depending on the assessment, you may lose marks every time you do this ... so these
mistakes can really add up!
In terms of significant figures, there are a few rules that you should know:
1 Any digit that isn’t a zero is significant (for example, 19.782 has five significant
figures).
2 Any zero that is found between two significant numbers is significant (for example,
19.702 has five significant figures).
3 After the decimal point, a zero that doesn’t come between two significant numbers
is only significant if it comes at the end (for example, 0.78200 has five significant
figures, whereas 0.00782 has three significant figures).
If you are multiplying or dividing, you consider all significant figures provided in the
question. For your answer, you will use the same number of significant figures as the
value in the question that contains the LEAST number of significant figures (not just
after the decimal point).
Let’s do an example.
Question: Multiply the following values: 54.7 and 0.02.
Answer: 1.094. However, our answer should use the smallest number of significant
figures in the question. Therefore, our actual answer is 1 (because 0.02 is only one
significant figure).
If you are adding or subtracting, the number of digits to the right of the decimal point in
the answer will be the same as the number of digits to the right of the decimal point in
the number with the fewest digits to the right of the decimal point.
Let’s look at the question above, but instead of multiplying the values, we will add them.
Question: Add the following values: 54.7 and 0.02.
Answer: 54.72. However, our answer should only include one digit to the right of the
decimal point, as this is the fewest provided in the question. Therefore, our actual
answer is 54.7.
Section 2C questions
1 Use the heat of combustion values from Table 2C–1, where applicable, to calculate:
a the total energy in 14 g of protein bar.
b the available energy in a 150 g piece of celery if it is 62% water, 18% glucose and
20% fibre.
c the energy stored in a 3 kg calf muscle, assuming muscles are 87% protein and 13% fat.
d the difference in total energy between a dried apple and a fresh apple of the same
variety, assuming apples are predominantly carbohydrates and fibre.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
2C MEASURING ENERGy FROM FOOD
69
2 The nutritional information from a packet of food is shown below. Use this information
and Table 2C–1 to answer the following questions.
a How much energy is provided by protein in one serve of this food?
b For one serve of this food, how much energy from carbohydrates is available energy?
c For one serve of this food, how much energy is available from fats?
d How much total energy can be released from the food under combustion for the
entire packet of food?
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
70
Chapter 2 review
Summary
Create your own set of summary notes for this chapter, on paper or in a digital document. A model
summary is provided in the Teacher Resources and can be used to compare with yours.
Checklist
In the Interactive Textbook, the success criteria are linked from the review questions and will be
automatically ticked when answers are correct. Alternatively, print or photocopy this page and tick
the boxes when you have answered the corresponding questions correctly.
Success criteria – I am now able to: Linked questions
2A.1 2A.2 2A.3 2A.4 2B.1 2B.2 2B.3 2B.4 2B.5 2B.6 2B.7 2C.1 2C.2 2C.3  Recall principles of stoichiometry in balancing equations  Determine the heat produced from combustion reactions using
the equation E = ∆H × n
 Use stoichiometry to calculate reactant and product amounts,
and net volume or mass of major greenhouse gases
 Perform calculations involving excess and limiting reagents in
combustion reactions
 Define ‘specific heat capacity’ and its units  Recall the properties of water that lead to its use in specific heat
experiments
 Perform calculations using the equation q = mcΔT  State the principles of solution calorimetry  Analyse graphical data to determine the calibration factor of a
calorimeter
 Use experimental data to calculate the calibration factor of a
calorimeter and energy produced from chemical reactions
 Calculate energy transformation efficiency from given
experimental data
 Use reference tables for heats of combustion of different food
groups
 Determine the energy content of a food based on food group
composition
 Calculate the energy content of a food using calorimetry 1☐
2☐, 13☐
3☐, 13☐
13☐
5☐
4☐
7☐, 13☐
6☐, 10☐, 11☐
14☐
12☐, 13☐
13☐
8☐
9☐
13☐
Multiple-choice questions
1 Which of the following equations is correctly balanced?
A C4H10(g) + 6.5O2(g) → 4CO2(g) + 5H2O(g)
B 2C4H10(g) + 13O2(g) → 8CO2(g) + 10H2O(g)
C 3C4H10(g) + 19.5O2(g) → 12CO2(g) + 15H2O(g)
D 4C4H10(g) + 26O2(g) → 16CO2(g) + 20H2O(g)
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
71
2 For the combustion of 44 g of propane, which of the following gives the correct amount of heat
energy produced?
C3H8(g) + 5O2(g) → 3CO2(g) + 4H2O(l) ΔH = 2220 kJ mol–1
A –2220 kJ
B +2220 kJ
C –50.45 kJ
D +50.45 kJ
3 Which of the following is not required to solve for the amount of a greenhouse gas produced in
a combustion reaction?
A stoichiometric ratio
B the amount of reactant
C the presence or absence of a catalyst
D the amount of product
4 Which material would have the highest specific heat capacity at SLC?
A methane
B ethanol
C aluminium
D water
5 Which of the following gives the correct units for the specific heat capacity of a material?
A kJ mol–1
B J°C mol–1
C J g–1
mol–1
D J g–1°C–1
6 Which of the following is common to a solution calorimeter?
A stirrer and pH meter
B bomb chamber and stirrer
C thermometer and stirrer
D thermometer and pH meter
7 A burning candle was used to heat water in a can. The equation q = mc∆T was used to
determine the amount of heat released by the combustion of the candle. Which of the
following is incorrect?
A The value of c in the specific heat equation depends on the material being heated.
B The value of m in the specific heat equation is based on the mass of the material reacting.
C The change in temperature refers to the temperature change in the water.
D The units for q are joules.
8 Which of the following nutrients produces the most energy when completely combusted?
A 12 g of protein
B 9 g of carbohydrates
C 11 g of fat
D 6 g of fat and 8 g of protein
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
72
9 The label on a 100 g can of baked beans says it consists of 28% carbohydrates, 41% protein and
8% fat, with the remaining mass being water. What is the energy value of the baked beans?
A 19 kJ g–1
B 8.3 kJ g–1
C 14 kJ g–1
D 21 kJ g–1
10 Which of the following is not a type of calibration method for calorimeters?
A electrical
B reference material
C benzoic acid
D pure oxygen
Short-answer questions
11 Draw and label a solution calorimeter.  12 List the steps in calibrating a calorimeter using a single approach. 13 A student performed a calorimetry experiment to determine the heat of combustion
of propan-2-ol, according to the following procedure.
1 Add 500 mL of cold water to a beaker. Record the initial temperature.
2 Fill a spirit burner with propan-2-ol. Record the mass of the spirit burner.
3 Ignite the spirit burner and place directly below the beaker. Stir the water gently while
monitoring the temperature.
4 When the temperature has risen by approximately 10°C, extinguish the flame.
5 Record the final mass of the spirit burner.
The student recorded the following data.
(5 marks)
(5 marks)
Initial temperature of water (°C) 15.1
Final temperature of water (°C) 25.3
Initial mass of spirit burner (g) 124.5
Final mass of spirit burner (g) 125.8
a Calculate the heat of combustion of propan-2-ol. (2 marks)
b Given the theoretical molar heat of combustion for propan-2-ol is 2017.7 kJ mol–1
,
calculate the percentage energy efficiency. (3 marks)
c Suggest a possible explanation for why the heat of combustion determined by
the student is significantly lower than the reported value. (1 mark)
d Suggest one improvement to the experimental set-up that could be made to
improve accuracy. (1 mark)
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
73
14 The table and graph below show data from the manual calibration of a calorimeter.
Volume of water in calorimeter 150 g
Current (I ) 3.00 A
Time (s) 20 s
Voltage (V ) 2.5 V
Initial temperature 22.2°C
Final temperature 65.1°C
Temperature (°C)
75
70
65
60
55
50
45
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
Heater turned off
∆T
Heater turned on
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 110 120 130
Time (s)
 a  Calculate the calibration factor for this calorimeter. (3 marks)
b  Comment on how the shape of the temperature–time graph would change if the
lid was leaking, the heating element was faulty or the surrounding water had
contaminants. (3 marks)
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
74
UNIT
3
HOW CAN DESIGN AND INNOVATION HELP
TO OPTIMISE CHEMICAL PROCESSES?
CHAPTER
3
GALVANIC CELLS
Introduction
Society is becoming more and more reliant on portable electrical energy.
Mobile phones, cameras, drones, remote controls, calculators, car batteries
and laptops are just a few examples where the convenience of this energy being
available anywhere and any time is evident. Galvanic cells are used commonly
as a means of storing and providing electrical energy. In this chapter, you will uncover
the chemistry behind the production of electrical energy by galvanic cells. You will
revisit redox reactions that produce electrical energy, learn about the features of
galvanic cells and use the electrochemical series to predict reactions and calculate the
potential voltage that can be generated by specific galvanic cells.
Curriculum
Area of Study 1 Outcome 1
Primary galvanic cells and fuel cells as sources of energy
Study Design: Learning intentions – at the end of the chapter I will be able to:
INTRODUCTION
VIDEO
GALVANIC CELLS
•
Redox reactions
as simultaneous
oxidation and
reduction processes,
and the use of
oxidation numbers to
identify the reducing
agent, oxidising
agent and conjugate
redox pairs
3A  Reduction and oxidation
3A.1  Define ‘redox’ in terms of reduction, oxidation and
electron transfer
3A.2 3A.3 3A.4  Explain what a redox reaction involves
 Define and identify ‘reducing agent’ and ‘oxidising agent’
 Assign oxidation numbers to elements in compounds and
ions in chemical equations and use these numbers to
identify reactions as redox
3A.5  Use oxidation numbers to identify conjugate redox pairs
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
75
Study Design: Learning intentions – at the end of the chapter I will be able to:
•
The writing of
balanced half-
equations (including
states) for oxidation
and reduction
reactions, and the
overall redox cell
reaction in both acidic
and basic conditions
3B  Writing redox equations
3B.1  Write and balance simple and complex half-equations for
oxidation and reduction reactions
3B.2  Write and balance overall redox equations, including states,
in acidic conditions
3B.3  Write and balance overall redox equations, including states,
in basic conditions
3B.4  Write and balance half-equations by identifying redox
couples in overall equations
•
The common design
features and general
operating principles
of non-rechargeable
(primary) galvanic
cells converting
chemical energy into
electrical energy,
including electrode
polarities and the role
of the electrodes (inert
and reactive) and
electrolyte solutions
(details of specific
cells not required)
3C 3C.1 3C.2 3C.3 3C.4 3C.5 3C.6 3C.7 3C.8  Features of galvanic cells
 Recall and explain the importance of the key design features
of galvanic cells
 Identify, name, draw and label features of galvanic cells
 Identify the chemical processes involved in primary galvanic
cells, including the type of redox reaction occurring at
each electrode
 Identify the direction of electron flow and ion flow in
galvanic cells
 Write the half-equation for the reaction occurring at each
electrode in a galvanic cell
 Write the overall equation for a galvanic cell
 Describe the importance of separating two half-cells to
facilitate the transformation of chemical energy to electrical
energy in a galvanic cell
 Explain the role of inert and reactive electrodes and
electrolyte solutions in the reactions taking place in a
galvanic cell
3D 3D.1 3D.2 3D.3 3D.4 3D.5 •
The use and
limitations of the
electrochemical
series in designing
galvanic cells and as
a tool for predicting
the products of
redox reactions, for
deducing overall
equations from redox
half-equations and for
determining maximum
cell voltage under
standard conditions
VCE Chemistry Study Design extracts © VCAA; reproduced by permission.
 Using the electrochemical series
 Apply information presented in the elcetrochemical series
to questions
 Predict whether certain combinations of reactants will
produce electrical energy in a galvanic cell
 Compare the relative strengths of reducing agents and
oxidising agents
 Predict the products, and therefore the overall equation, of a
redox reaction in a galvanic cell
 Use the electrochemical series to calculate the maximum
cell voltage generated under standard laboratory conditions
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
76
Glossary
Anode
Cathode
Chemical energy
Complex half-equation
Conjugate redox pair
Electrical energy
Electrochemical cell
Electrochemical series
Electrode
Electrode polarity
Electrolyte
Electron transfer
Galvanic cell
Half-cell
Half-equation
Inert
Ion
Oxidation
Oxidation number
Oxidising agent
Potential difference
Primary cell
Redox couple
Redox reaction
Reducing agent
Reduction
Salt bridge
Simple half-equation
Species
Spontaneous reaction
Standard cell potential
Standard electrode potential
Standard hydrogen electrode
Voltage
Voltmeter
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
CONCEPT MAP
77
Concept map
OIL
RIG
3A Reduction and oxidation
Reactions that involve the loss
and gain of electrons
Oxidation is Loss
Reduction is Gain
3B Writing redox equations
Writing and balancing redox
reactions in acidic and basic
conditions
3D Using the electrochemical series
Predictions of the redox reactions
that will occur and the voltage they
will produce
Oxidising
agent
is reduced
3C Features of galvanic cells
Using spontaneous redox reactions
to convert chemical energy into
electrical energy
Electrochemical cell (Galvanic cell)
V
e– e–
reacts with
is oxidised
Reducing
agent
Anode
Zn(s)
– +
Salt bridge
Cathode
Cu(s)
Oxidation
Reduction
Zn2+ Cu2+
Zn(s) → Zn2+(aq) + 2e– Cu2+(aq) + 2e–
→ Cu(s)
See the Interactive Textbook for an interactive version of this concept map
interlinked with all concept maps for the course.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
78 CHAPTER 3 GALVANIC CELLS
3A
Reduction and oxidation
Study Design:
•
Redox reactions as simultaneous
oxidation and reduction
processes, and the use of
oxidation numbers to identify the
reducing agent, oxidising agent
and conjugate redox pairs
Glossary:
Electron transfer
Half-equation
Oxidation
Oxidation number
Oxidising agent
Redox couple
Redox reaction
Reducing agent
Reduction
Species
ENGAGE
What is oxidation?
You have likely heard of reduction and oxidation from your study of chemistry.
However, where did these terms come from, and when and how were redox reactions
first discovered?
The terms ‘reduction’ and ‘oxidation’ stem from the historical exploration of
combustion, which was the first type of oxidation studied. In 1775, English scientist,
Joseph Priestley, who had discovered oxygen about a year earlier, met with French
chemist, Antoine Lavoisier, who went on to revolutionise the field of chemistry by
investigating the role of oxygen in combustion reactions. Lavoisier’s work helped to
later establish that combustion reactions involved materials combining with oxygen,
and these reactions were classified as oxidation reactions. Alternatively, those reactions
where oxygen was produced were classified as reduction reactions.
Often, when oxygen is involved in a reaction, it will be acting as an oxidising agent.
However, this is not always the case; but when redox reactions were first discovered by
Priestley and Lavoisier, they believed that oxygen was always involved, which is another
reason why the term ‘oxidation’ was adopted.
Figure 3A–1 French chemist Antoine Lavoisier revolutionised the field of
chemistry with his discovery of the role oxygen plays in combustion reactions.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
3A REDUCTION AND OXIDATION
79
EXPLAIN
Most of the material in the following two sections is also covered in Units 1 and 2. However,
it is also assessable in Units 3 and 4, hence its inclusion. Where possible, questions and
examples have been altered. However, please note that in Section 3B, new material has
been added in order to cover redox reactions under basic conditions. This was not required
learning for the Units 1 and 2 course and is potentially examinable content.
What is redox?
The word redox is a combined abbreviation for reduction and oxidation, which are two
different processes that occur simultaneously during a redox reaction. A redox reaction
involves an electron transfer from one chemical species to another.
Therefore, reduction can be defined as the gain of electrons and oxidation as the loss of
electrons. A nice way to remember this is using the mnemonic OILRIG – Oxidation Is Loss
(of electrons), Reduction Is Gain (of electrons).
LINK
UNITS 1 & 2
3B WRITING
REDOX
EQUATIONS
OIL
Oxidation is Loss
RIG
Reduction is Gain
NOTE
There is also a ‘rule of thumb’, most often used by organic chemists, which identifies a species in
a reaction as being oxidised due to a gain of oxygen or loss of hydrogen, or being reduced due to
a loss of oxygen or gain of hydrogen. Note, however, that redox reactions do not always involve
hydrogen or oxygen.
The reaction between solid magnesium ribbon and oxygen gas, if performed at high
temperatures, produces solid magnesium oxide. The redox equation for this reaction can
be written as
Redox reaction
a reaction
involving a
transfer of
electrons. Both
reduction and
oxidation occur
simultaneously
Electron transfer
the exchange of
electrons that
occurs during a
redox reaction.
Electrons are
transferred from
the reducing
agent to the
oxidising agent
Species
any reactant
or product in
a chemical
reaction
Reduction
a gain of
electrons
Oxidation
a loss of
electrons
Oxidation
number
a measure of
the degree of
oxidation of
an atom in a
substance;
defined as the
charge an atom
might have
when electrons
are counted to
help identify
redox reactions,
oxidising agents
and reducing
agents
2Mg(s) + O2(g) → 2Mg2+(s) + 2O2–(s)
Reducing agents and oxidising agents
You should recall that ionic compounds are formed when there is a large difference in the
electronegativities of the bonding atoms. This commonly occurs between a non-metal
and a group 1 metal, a group 2 metal or a transition metal with a low oxidation number.
In a similar way, the redox reaction between magnesium and oxygen involves a transfer
of electrons from the magnesium atoms to the oxygen atoms. Given that oxidation is
the loss of electrons, in this reaction magnesium has undergone oxidation; it has been
oxidised. Similarly, the oxygen has undergone reduction; it has been reduced, since it is
the molecule that gained the electrons.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
80 CHAPTER 3 GALVANIC CELLS
Oxidising agent
the reactant in
a redox reaction
that causes
oxidation. It is
itself reduced
and therefore
will gain
electrons – its
oxidation number
will decrease
Reducing agent
the reactant in
a redox reaction
that causes
reduction. It is
itself oxidised
and therefore
will lose
electrons – its
oxidation number
will increase
It is also useful to identify the reducing agent and the oxidising agent in a reaction. The
species that causes oxidation of the other reactant (species) is termed the oxidising agent.
The species that causes reduction to occur to the other species is termed the reducing agent.
In the example on the previous page, magnesium causes the reduction of oxygen gas and
at the same time undergoes oxidation itself, losing electrons. Thus, magnesium can be
identified as the reducing agent in this reaction. Similarly, oxygen causes the oxidation
of magnesium and at the same time undergoes reduction itself, gaining electrons. Thus,
oxygen can be identified as the oxidising agent in this reaction.
electron transfer
Reducing agent
(undergoes oxidation)
2Mg(s) + O2(g) → 2Mg2+(s) + 2O2–(s)
Oxidising agent
(undergoes reduction)
NOTE
It is helpful to remember that the species that undergoes reduction will be the oxidising agent,
and the species that undergoes oxidation will be the reducing agent.
Check-in questions – Set 1
1 Define the following terms.
a reduction
b oxidation
c redox reaction
2 Describe what happens to the oxidising agent during a redox reaction.
VIDEO 3A–1
USING
OXIDATION
NUMBERS
Oxidation numbers
It is not always easy to identify whether electrons are being transferred or not in a chemical
reaction, nor is it obvious which species is gaining or losing them. To help identify whether
a species is gaining or losing electrons and consequently whether it is undergoing reduction
or oxidation, we can use oxidation numbers.
Writing oxidation numbers
While not official IUPAC convention, oxidation numbers are easily represented when
written directly above the element as –1, 0, +1, +2 and so on. It is important to distinguish
between this format and that of an ion. For example, the magnesium ion, Mg2+, has an ionic
charge of 2+, but its oxidation number is written as +2, usually like this:
+2 Oxidation number
Mg
2+
Assigning oxidation numbers
You can work out the oxidation number of an unknown element by applying several rules
to identify the oxidation numbers in other elements present in a species. Although many
elements will often have the same oxidation number, some elements can have multiple
oxidation numbers. One example of this is nitrogen, which can have oxidation numbers
ranging from –3 to +5!
The rules to follow when assigning oxidation numbers, as well as exceptions to some rules
that are particularly important to remember, are summarised in Table 3A–1.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
3A REDUCTION AND OXIDATION
81
Table 3A–1 Oxidation numbers rules and examples
Category Rule Example(s)
Free elements
Oxidation number = 0 (zero)
A free element is any element that
exists on its own and that is not a
charged ion. It may be monoatomic
or polyatomic but must contain only
one type of element.
Solid iron metal, Fe(s)
Hydrogen gas, H2(g)
Oxygen gas, O2(g)
Sulfur, S8(s)
Carbon, C(s)
Hydrogen
Typical oxidation
number = +1
Alternative oxidation
number = –1
The alternative oxidation number
only occurs when hydrogen is
part of a metal hydride. This is
because metal hydrides are ionic
compounds, and as such, the metal
ion will have an oxidation number
equal to its charge. To achieve an
overall neutral charge for metal
hydrides, hydrogen must have an
oxidation number of –1.
Methane, CH4
In this neutral molecule, hydrogen will
have its typical oxidation number of +1.
Exception: Sodium hydride, NaH.
In this case, the sodium ion will have an
oxidation number of +1, and the hydrogen
will have an oxidation number of –1.
Oxygen
Typical oxidation
number = –2
Alternative oxidation
number = –1
Oxygen will typically have an
oxidation number of –2 when it is
not a free element. The alternative
oxidation number occurs only when
oxygen is part of a peroxide, such as
hydrogen peroxide, H2O2.
Carbon dioxide, CO2
In this neutral molecule, oxygen will have
an oxidation number of –2.
Exception: Hydrogen peroxide, H2O2.
In this molecule, hydrogen will have an
oxidation number of +1, and oxygen will
have an oxidation number of –1.
Pure ions
Oxidation number = ionic
charge
Pure ions have an oxidation number
equal to their ionic charge.
Aluminium ions, Al3+
These ions will have an ionic charge of 3+
and an oxidation number of +3.
Neutral compounds
The sum of the oxidation
numbers will be 0 (zero).
Neutral compounds, as well as
having an overall neutral charge,
will also be neutral in their overall
oxidation number total.
Water, H2O
In the neutral molecule of water, hydrogen
has an oxidation number of +1 and oxygen
has an oxidation number of –2. There are
two hydrogen atoms, so overall:
(2 × +1) + (–2) = 0.
Polyatomic ions
The sum of the oxidation
numbers = charge on
the ion
Polyatomic ions have an overall
oxidation number equal to the
charge on the polyatomic ion.
Sulfate ions, SO4
2–
These polyatomic ions have an overall
ionic charge of 2–. Oxygen has an
oxidation number of –2, and there are four
atoms of oxygen, so 4 × –2 = –8. Sulfur
must have an oxidation number of +6, to
match the overall charge on the ion.
–8 + (+6) = –2.
NOTE
The most electronegative element in a compound must be assigned a negative oxidation number.
Therefore, fluorine, being the most electronegative element, will always have an oxidation
number of –1. There are no exceptions to this scenario. More generally, group 17 halogens usually
have an oxidation number of –1, but not always. Chlorine, in some cases, can have a positive
oxidation number. An example of this is chlorine dioxide, ClO2, where chlorine has an oxidation
number of +4 because oxygen is more electronegative than chlorine and hence is assigned the
oxidation number of –2.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
82 CHAPTER 3 GALVANIC CELLS
VIDEO
WORKED
EXAMPLE 3A–1
Worked example 3A–1: Assigning oxidation numbers
Determine the oxidation number for each of the elements in the permanganate ion,
MnO4
–
.
Solution
Logic Process
Step 1 Oxygen has an oxidation number of –2 (unless in
a peroxide, which the permanganate ion is not).
Then determine the total number of oxygen atoms.
O = –2
Four oxygen atoms
4 × –2 = –8
Step 2 Need to recognise that this is a polyatomic ion, so
the sum of the oxidation numbers must add up to
the corresponding charge on the ion.
Charge on permanganate
ion = 1–, so sum of oxidation
numbers must equal –1.
Step 3 Determine the oxidation number of the unknown
atom, taking into consideration the number of these.
There is one Mn atom.
Use algebra and assign Mn
as ‘x’.
x + (–8) = –1
x = –1 – (–8)
x = +7
Step 4 Write down the oxidation numbers of all elements. Mn = +7
O = –2
+7 –2
MnO4
–
Check-in questions – Set 2
1 Assign oxidation numbers to each element in the species below.
a Na b NaCl
c SO2 d CO3
2–
e NaBrO3
2 Determine the oxidation number for sulfur, S, in each of the following compounds.
a S8 b SO4
2–
c SO2 d H2S
e S2– f SO3
Using oxidation numbers
Identifying reducing agents and oxidising agents
A change in oxidation number of an element can be used to identify reducing agents and
oxidising agents. If the oxidation number increases for an element during a reaction, it
indicates that it has undergone oxidation, losing electrons (hence becoming ‘more positive’)
and is therefore called the reducing agent. Similarly, if the oxidation number decreases for
an element during a reaction, it indicates that it has undergone reduction, gaining electrons
(hence becoming ‘less positive’) and is therefore identified as the oxidising agent.
+2 0
Fe2+(aq) + 2e– → Fe(s)
In the equation shown above, Fe2+(aq) ions are reduced because the oxidation number of
iron decreases from +2 to 0. Fe(s) has gained electrons.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
3A REDUCTION AND OXIDATION
83
In half-equations such as this, an alternative way to determine whether reduction or
oxidation is taking place is to identify on which side of the equation the electrons are
present. If electrons are on the left-hand side, as shown in Figure 3A–2, then it is a
reduction half-equation. If electrons are on the right-hand side, then it is an oxidation
half-equation.
Cu2+(aq) + 2e– → Cu(s)–
Reduction
Zn(s) → Zn2+(aq) + 2e– –
Oxidation
electrons gained
electrons lost
Figure 3A–2 Reduction and oxidation half-equations showing location of electrons
This is useful when dealing with half-equations where electrons are shown. However, for
more complex redox reactions, oxidation numbers are necessary, as shown in Worked
example 3A–2.
Half-equation
either the
reduction or
oxidation part of
a redox reaction
DOC
Worked example 3A–2: Identifying reducing and oxidising agents
WORKSHEET
3A–1 OXIDATION
NUMBERS
VIDEO
WORKED
EXAMPLE 3A–2
Determine the reducing agent and oxidising agent in the reaction between lead ions,
Pb2+, and zinc metal, Zn, that produces lead metal, Pb, and zinc ions, Zn2+
.
Solution
Logic Process
Step 1 Write out the full balanced
equation, including states.
Pb2+(aq) + Zn(s) → Pb(s) + Zn2+(aq)
Step 2 Assign oxidation numbers
to each species present in
the equation.
+2 +2
0 0
Pb2+(aq) + Zn(s) → Pb(s) + Zn2+(aq)
Step 3 Answer the question
by using the change in
oxidation numbers of the
atoms/ions.
Pb2+(aq) ions have been reduced since the
oxidation number decreases from +2 to 0.
Zn(s) has been oxidised to Zn2+(aq) ions because
its oxidation number has increased from 0 to +2.
Zn(s) can be identified as the reducing agent, and
Pb2+(aq) ions are therefore the oxidising agent.
Important considerations when using oxidation numbers
In many redox reactions, the same elements are often involved as reactants and as
products. It is particularly important to note the difference in states and charges when
you are describing changes in a redox reaction or when you are asked to identify reducing
agents or oxidising agents. For example, copper ions, Cu2+(aq), are a different chemical
species compared to copper solid, Cu(s).
In addition, where the element whose oxidation number changes during a redox reaction
belongs to a polyatomic species, you should include the entire reactant compound that
contains the element when naming the reducing agent or oxidising agent. Consider
Worked example 3A–3 on the following page, where oxidation numbers are shown.
NOTE
Recall from Units 1 & 2 that roman numerals are used for oxidation numbers.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
84 CHAPTER 3 GALVANIC CELLS
VIDEO
WORKED
EXAMPLE 3A–3
Worked example 3A–3: Identifying reducing and oxidising agents
Determine the reducing agent and oxidising agent in the reaction between iron(III)
oxide and carbon monoxide.
Solution
Logic Process
Step 1 Write out the full
balanced equation,
including states.
Fe2O3(s) + 3CO(g) → 2Fe(s) + 3CO2(g)
Step 2 Assign oxidation
numbers to each
species present in the
equation.
reduction
oxidation
+3 –2 – +2 –2 – 0
+4 –2 –
Fe2O3(s) + 3CO(g) → 2Fe(s) + 3CO2(g)
Step 3 Answer the question
by using the change
in oxidation numbers
of the atoms/ions.
Iron, Fe, shows an oxidation number change from +3 to
0, meaning that it has been reduced (gained electrons).
However, if you were stating the oxidising agent, you
would state iron oxide, Fe2O3(s), as this is the chemical
species causing the oxidation of the carbon monoxide.
Similarly, the reducing agent for this reaction would be
identified as carbon monoxide, CO(g), even though only
the carbon undergoes an oxidation number increase
(due to oxidation, loss of electrons).
Redox couple
a reducing
agent, which
donates
electrons, and
its corresponding
oxidising agent,
which accepts
electrons
Identifying redox couples
During a redox reaction, the species acting as a reducing agent on the reactant side donates
(loses) electrons and in doing so forms a product that is an oxidising agent. At the same
time, the reactant acting as the oxidising agent is converted into a product that is a reducing
agent. The association of each reactant and the product it forms during a redox reaction is
referred to as a redox couple.
For example, when copper metal undergoes oxidation, losing electrons, the copper ions
produced could act as an oxidising agent, gaining electrons.
Redox couple
Cu(s)  Cu2+(aq) + 2e–
Reducing agent  Oxidising agent
In a similar way, when zinc ions undergo reduction to zinc solid, the zinc solid could then
act as a reducing agent.
Redox couple
Zn2+(aq) + 2e–  Zn(s)
Oxidising agent  Reducing agent
NOTE
The complete electrochemical series can be found in the Units 3 & 4 VCE Chemistry Exam Data
Book, as well as in the appendix on page 542 of this textbook, and shows an extensive list of these
redox couples, arranged in order of increasing strength of the reducing agent.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
3A REDUCTION AND OXIDATION
85
Your ability to identify redox couples will be equally important in the next section of this
chapter when you explore how to write half-equations from full redox equations. In most
cases, you will be required to identify redox couples in full redox reactions rather than in
half-equations. Each redox reaction will therefore have two redox couples.
To identify a redox couple, the following are required:
1 There must be one species on the reactant side and one species on the product side of
the equation containing the same element.
2 There must be a change in oxidation number.
Figure 3A–3 shows that copper has an oxidation number of +2 in copper oxide, CuO, on
the reactant side, which decreases to 0 in copper (solid) on the product side. This is the
first redox couple. In a similar way, the hydrogen gas and water can be identified as the
second redox couple, where hydrogen shows an increase in oxidation number from
0 to +1.
Redox couple
+2 –2
CuO(s)
Redox couple
0
0
+ → +
H2(g)
Cu(s)
+1 –2
H2O(I)
Oxidising
agent
Reducing
agent
Reducing
agent
Oxidising
agent
Figure 3A–3 Each redox reaction has two redox couples.
NOTE
You may have noticed that Figure 3A–3 also includes an element that does not change oxidation
number. In this case, it is oxygen. If an element does not have a change in oxidation number
during a redox reaction, it means that element is not undergoing reduction or oxidation.
Check-in questions – Set 3
1 State whether the following reactions are redox or not and explain why.
a Mn(s) + Cu2+(aq) → Mn2+(aq) + Cu(s)
b Na2CO3(aq) + 2HCl(aq) → CO2(g) + H2O(l) + 2NaCl(aq)
2 Identify whether the following are reduction or oxidation reactions.
a K(s) → K+(aq) + e– b 2Br–(aq) → Br2(l) + 2e–
3 Assign oxidation numbers to each element in the following reactions.
a Na2CO3 → Na2O + CO2 b C6H12O6 + 6O2 → 6CO2 + 6H2O
4 For each reaction in Question 3, state whether carbon has been reduced or oxidised.
5 For each reaction in Question 3, identify which species is the reducing agent and which
species is the oxidising agent.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
86 CHAPTER 3 GALVANIC CELLS
VIDEO 3A–2
SKILLS:
IMPORTANCE
OF OXIDATION
NUMBERS
3A SKILLS
Importance of oxidation numbers
In this section, you have seen the value of being able to assign and use oxidation
numbers. The following important steps help you to do this.
1 Identify reactions as redox reactions (or not).
2 Identify reduction.
3 Identify oxidation.
4 Identify reducing agents.
5 Identify oxidising agents.
6 Identify redox couples.
7 Identify the movement of electrons.
Concept-mapping from key glossary terms
This section has explored much of the underlying chemistry and key definitions for redox
reactions, including how to identify reduction, oxidation, reducing agents, oxidising
agents, redox couples and ways of assigning and using oxidation numbers. Table 3A–2
and Figure 3A–4 summarise the key concepts covered but also highlight how the
language you need to know and understand has a lot of similarities. This can sometimes
cause confusion initially, so it is important to use the glossary terms throughout this
chapter to help you solidify your understanding of the language used. A useful activity to
consolidate your ability to correctly use these terms is to create your own concept map
showing connections between the terms. You could also annotate the concept map at
the beginning of the chapter to further consolidate the connections between the related
terminology used.
Table 3A–2 Comparing oxidation and reduction
Oxidation Reduction
Loss of electrons Gain of electrons
Electrons on right-hand side of half-equations Electrons on left-hand side of half-equations
Oxidation number increases Oxidation number decreases
Caused by oxidising agent Caused by reducing agent
Reducing agent undergoes oxidation Oxidising agent undergoes reduction
T
r
a
n
s
f
e
r
o
f
e
l
e
c
t
r
o
n
s
–
e
Reducing agent Oxidising agent
– Loses electrons
– Reduces the oxidising agent
– Undergoes oxidation
– Oxidation number increases
– Gains electrons
– Oxidises the reducing agent
– Undergoes reduction
– Oxidation number decreases
Figure 3A–4 Summary of key terms and concepts for reducing agents
and oxidising agents
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
3A REDUCTION AND OXIDATION
87
Section 3A questions
1 Use these terms to correctly complete the sentences below.
decreases gain loss oxidised
electrons increases oxidation reduced
Redox reactions involve a transfer of __________. During a redox reaction, both
reduction and ___________ occur simultaneously. Oxidation is the ______ of electrons
and reduction is the _____ of electrons. Oxidation numbers can be used to identify
the reducing agent and oxidising agent. During a redox reaction, the oxidising agent
is __________, and its oxidation number ___________. At the same time, the reducing
agent is ______________, and its oxidation number ___________.
2 Write a definition for oxidation in terms of oxidation numbers.
3 Use oxidation numbers to identify which of the following reactions is not a redox reaction.
a Ag(s) + H2S(g) → Ag2S(s) + H2(g)
b HCl(aq) + KOH(aq) → H2O(l) + KCl(aq)
c Zn(s) + O2(g) → Zn2O3(s)
d 2Ag+(aq) + Sn(s) → Sn2+(aq) + Ag(s)
4 Classify each half-equation as reduction or oxidation.
a Sn4+(aq) + 2e–
→ Sn2+(aq)
b 2Cl–(aq) → Cl2(g) + 2e–
c Fe2+(aq) + e–
→ Fe+(aq)
5 For each of the reactions below, explain how you would determine oxidation numbers to
help you identify the reducing agent and the oxidising agent.
a Ni2+(aq) + Zn(s) → Zn2+(aq) + Ni(s)
b Zn(s) + Cl2(g) → ZnCl2(s)
6 Consider the reaction:
ZnO(s) + H2(g) → Zn(s) + H2O(l)
a Identify the two redox couples.
b State which species is being reduced and which is being oxidised.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
88 CHAPTER 3 GALVANIC CELLS
3B
Writing redox equations
Study Design:
•
The writing of balanced half-equations (including states)
for oxidation and reduction reactions, and the overall
redox cell reaction in both acidic and basic conditions
Glossary:
Complex half-equation
Simple half-equation
3C
FEATURES OF
GALVANIC CELLS
LINK
ENGAGE
What conditions are needed for redox reactions?
What conditions are needed for a redox reaction to take place? Do they even matter?
Redox reactions can take place in a range of conditions, including neutral, basic or acidic
conditions. These conditions do have some influence over what species are involved
during a redox reaction and are important to consider when writing balanced equations
for a given scenario.
In basic conditions, the OH– ions play a role in the redox reactions that can take place.
You might already be familiar with alkaline batteries; these are examples of redox
reactions taking place in basic conditions. Car batteries, on the other hand, are an
example of redox reactions taking place in acidic conditions. You will learn more about
batteries and cells and their conditions in Section 3C.
VIDEO 3B–1
HALF-
EQUATIONS
Figure 3B–1 AA batteries (left) are an example of redox reactions occurring under basic
conditions. Car batteries (right) are an example of redox reactions occurring under acidic
conditions.
UNIT 2
LINK
Simple half-
equation
either the
reduction or
oxidation part of
a redox reaction
involving only
one element
EXPLAIN
While most of this material is repeated from Units 1 and 2, please note that new material
has been added to cover redox reactions under basic conditions. This was not required
learning for the Units 1 and 2 course and is potentially examinable content.
Writing redox half-equations
Simple half-equations
You should recall that redox reactions involve both reduction and oxidation. As you have
already seen in Section 3A, reduction and oxidation reactions can be written as separate
half-equations, which show the electrons either as reactants in reduction half-equations or
as products in oxidation half-equations. These are referred to as simple half-equations.
3A REDUCTION
AND OXIDATION
LINK
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
3B WRITING REDOX eqUATIONS
89
When writing simple half-equations, which contain only one type of element, there are a
few steps that you need to follow. Applying the acronym ECS will help you to remember
these three critical steps.
1 Write the species on the correct side of the equation and then balance the Element
involved.
2 Balance the Charges in the equation. This is done by adding the appropriate number of
electrons to the more positive side of the half-equation. Note that you can apply your
understanding of oxidation numbers to each element in an equation to determine this.
3 Finally, ensure that you have included correct States for each element listed.
NOTE
When assigning states for redox equations in this course, note the following points.
1 Ions are always aqueous, (aq).
2 Electrons have no state.
3 Water, H2O, is always liquid, (l).
Worked example 3B–1: Writing oxidation half-equations
VIDEO
WORKED
EXAMPLE 3B–1
Write the half-equation to represent the oxidation of solid zinc, Zn(s), to zinc ions,
Zn2+(aq).
Solution
Logic Process
Step 1
E
From the description provided, write the species on
the appropriate side of the equation. In this example,
the moles of Zn is the same on each side, so the
Elements are balanced.
Zn → Zn2+
Step 2
C
Identify which side is more positive and by how many
units. This can be done by applying oxidation numbers.
Add the appropriate number of electrons to that side.
In this example, the right-hand side is more positive
by 2, meaning that two electrons need to be added to
this side, which balances the Charges.
0 +2
Zn → Zn2+ + 2e–
Step 3
S
Add States to each element as required. Zn(s) → Zn2+(aq) + 2e–
Figure 3B–2 In the above reaction, solid zinc (Zn) is converted to Zn2+ ions.
These ions then go on to react with oxygen, forming zinc oxide.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
90 CHAPTER 3 GALVANIC CELLS
NOTE
The charges on each side of an equation do not necessarily have to equal zero. You must only
balance the charges so that they are the same on each side of the half-equation.
VIDEO
WORKED
EXAMPLE 3B–2
Worked example 3B–2: Writing reduction half-equations
Write the redox half-equation to represent the reduction of bromine gas, Br2(g), to
bromide ions, Br–(aq).
Solution
Logic Process
Step 1
E
From the description provided, write the species on the
appropriate side of the equation.
In this example, there are two bromine atoms on the
left-hand side, but only one on the right-hand side. To
balance the elements, we need to add an extra bromide
ion, written as a coefficient in front of the species.
Br2 → Br–
Br2 → 2Br–
Step 2
C
Identify which side is more positive and by how many units.
Add the appropriate number of electrons to that side.
In this example, the left-hand side is more positive by 2,
meaning that two electrons need to be added to this side.
Br2 + 2e–
→ 2Br–
Step 3
S
Add states to each element as required. Br2(g) + 2e–
→ 2Br–(aq)
Check-in questions – Set 1
1 Balance the following half-equations and identify each as either reduction or oxidation.
a Cl2(g) → Cl–(aq)
b Mn2+(aq) → Mn(s)
c K(s) → K+(aq)
Complex half-
equation
either the
reduction
or oxidation
component of a
redox reaction
involving
more than one
element
Complex half-equations
Complex half-equations contain more than one element and therefore require a different
approach to balance them correctly.
Balancing in acidic conditions
Applying the acronym KOHES shown below will help ensure you follow the appropriate
order to write and balance the half-equation if the reaction is taking place in acidic conditions.
Step Explanation
K Balance the Key element This will be the element that is not oxygen or hydrogen. This is done by
placing the correct coefficient in front of the required species.
O Balance the Oxygen This is done by adding water, H2O, to the opposite side of the equation to
the oxygen.
H Balance the Hydrogen This is done by adding hydrogen ions, H+, to the appropriate side of the
equation.
E Balance the Electrons Add the appropriate number of electrons to the more positive side of the
equation.
S It is imperative that you
include States on all species
Water should be given a liquid state, (l), and the hydrogen ions will be
written as aqueous, (aq).
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
Worked example 3B–3: Writing half-equations in acidic conditions
3B WRITING REDOX eqUATIONS
91
VIDEO
WORKED
EXAMPLE 3B–3
Dichromate ions, Cr2O7
2–, are a strong oxidising agent and as such can be reduced to
chromium ions, Cr3+. Write the half-equation to represent this, assuming the reaction
takes place in acidic conditions.
Solution
Logic Process
Step 1
K
Start by writing each species on the
appropriate side of the equation.
Balance the Key element, in this case the
chromium, Cr. There are two chromium
atoms on the left-hand side, but only
one on the right-hand side. Balance by
placing a 2 in front of the Cr3+
.
Cr2O7
2– → Cr3+
Cr2O7
2– → 2Cr3+
Step 2
O
Balance the Oxygen. Do this by adding
seven water (H2O) molecules to the
right-hand side.
Cr2O7
2– → 2Cr3+ + 7H2O
Step 3
H
Balance the Hydrogen. Do this by
adding 14 H+ ions to the left-hand side. Cr2O7
2– + 14H+ → 2Cr3+ + 7H2O
Step 4
E
Balance the charges by adding
Electrons to the more positive side. In
this example, the total of the charges is
+12 on the left-hand side and +6 on the
right-hand side. As such, six electrons
are needed on the left-hand side.
Cr2O7
2– + 14H+ + 6e–
→ 2Cr3+ + 7H2O
Step 5
S
Add States to the half-equation. Cr2O7
2–(aq) + 14H+(aq) + 6e–
2Cr3+(aq) + 7H2O(l)
→
Balancing in basic conditions
Balancing redox reactions in basic, or alkaline, conditions is slightly more complicated than
the steps involved for acidic conditions. The main reason is that each redox half-equation will
have both hydrogen ions, H+
, and hydroxide ions, OH–, added to it. These ions then combine
to make water, so there is some additional cancelling that takes place. We can still use the
KOHES method, but remember to include the two additional steps, which are shown below.
Step Explanation
K Balance the Key element This will be the element that is not oxygen or hydrogen. This is done by
placing the correct coefficient in front of the required species.
O Balance the Oxygen This is done by adding water, H2O, to the opposite side of the equation
to the oxygen.
H Balance the Hydrogen This is done by adding hydrogen ions, H+, to the appropriate side of the
equation.
Additional
step
OH–
Neutralise any H+ ions This is done by adding hydroxide ions, OH–, to both sides of the
equation.
Additional
step
H2O
Combine the H+ and OH– ions Combine any H+ and OH– ions that appear on the same side of the
equation, to make water. These water molecules can then potentially
cancel with any other water molecules on the opposite side of the equation.
E Balance the Electrons Add the appropriate number of electrons to the more positive side.
S It is imperative that you
Water should be given a liquid state, (l), and the hydrogen ions will be
include States on all species
written as aqueous, (aq).
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al © Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
92 CHAPTER 3 GALVANIC CELLS
VIDEO
WORKED
EXAMPLE 3B–4
Worked example 3B–4: Writing half-equations in basic conditions
The dichromate ion, Cr2O7
2–, is a strong oxidising agent and as such can be reduced to a
chromium ion, Cr3+. Write the half-equation to represent this assuming the reaction takes place
in alkaline conditions.
Solution
Logic Process
Step 1
K
Start by writing each species on the
appropriate side of the equation.
Balance the Key element, in this
case the chromium, Cr. There are
two chromium atoms on the left-
hand side, but only one on the right-
hand side. Balance by placing a 2 in
front of the Cr3+
.
Cr2O7
2– → Cr3+
Cr2O7
2– → 2Cr3+
Step 2
O
Balance the Oxygen. Do this by
adding seven water molecules to the
right-hand side.
Cr2O7
2– → 2Cr3+ + 7H2O
Step 3
H
Balance the Hydrogen. Do this by
adding 14 H+ ions to the left-hand
side.
Cr2O7
2– + 14H+ → 2Cr3+ + 7H2O
Step 4
OH–
Neutralise the H+ ions by adding
OH–. Do this by adding 14 OH– ions
to both sides of the equation.
Cr2O7
2– + 14H+ + 14OH–
→ 2Cr3+ + 7H2O + 14OH–
Step 5
H2O
Combine the H+ and OH– ions to
make water, then cancel the water
molecules on each side of the
equation where possible. In this
example, there are seven H2O that
cancel on each side.
Cr2O7
2– + 14H2O → 2Cr3+ + 7H2O + 14OH–
Cr2O7
2– + 14H2O → 2Cr3+ + 7H2O + 14OH–
Cr2O7
2– + 7H2O → 2Cr3+ + 14OH–
Step 6
E
Balance the charges by adding
Electrons to the more positive side.
In this example, the total of the
charges is –2 on the left-hand side
and –8 on the right-hand side. As
such, six electrons are needed on
the right-hand side.
6e– + Cr2O7
2– + 7H2O → 2Cr3+ + 14OH–
Step 7
S
Add States to the half-equation. 6e– + Cr2O7
2–(aq) + 7H2O(l) → 2Cr3+(aq) + 14OH–(aq)
Check-in questions – Set 2
1 Balance the following half-equations, assuming acidic conditions, and identify each
half-equation as reduction or oxidation.
a MnO4
–(aq) → Mn2+(aq) b H2SO3(aq) → SO4
2–(aq)
2 Balance the following half-equations, assuming basic conditions, and identify each
half-equation as reduction or oxidation.
a MnO4
–(aq) → Mn2+(aq) b H2SO3(aq) → SO4
2–(aq)
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
3B WRITING REDOX eqUATIONS
93
Combining half-equations
You should recall that redox reactions involve a transfer of electrons, where reduction and
oxidation both occur simultaneously. That is, you can’t have one without the other, and the
number of electrons that the oxidising agent gains, must be equal to the number of electrons
that the reducing agent loses. When considering half-equations, this means that the number
of electrons on the left-hand side of a reduction half-equation must be equal to the number
of electrons on the right-hand side of the corresponding oxidation half-equation.
In situations where the number of electrons differ in each half-equation, you must find the
lowest common multiple for the number of electrons. Do this by multiplying one or both
half-equations to ensure that the numbers of electrons are equal to this lowest common
multiple value. The half-equations can then be added or combined to give the full, overall
redox equation. Worked example 3B–5 shows you how to do this.
VIDEO
WORKED
EXAMPLE 3B–5
Worked example 3B–5: Combining redox half-equations
Write the combined redox equation for the reaction between silver ions and nickel metal.
Solution
Logic Process
Step 1 Write each of the balanced half-equations
that take place.
Ag+(aq) + e–
→ Ag(s)
Ni(s) → Ni2+(aq) + 2e–
Step 2 Balance the electrons in each equation by
finding the lowest common multiple.
The silver half-equation only has one
electron, whereas the nickel half-equation
contains two electrons.
To balance the electrons, we need to multiply
the silver half-equation by 2.
2 × (Ag+(aq) + e–
2Ag+(aq) + 2e–
→ Ag(s))
→ 2Ag(s)
Step 3 Combine the half-equations by adding them
together. A simple way of doing this is to write
each species that is on the left of the arrow
of the half-equations together on the left and
write each species that is on the right of the
arrow of the half-equations together on the
right.
Note that it is important to place the arrows
directly below each other.
2Ag+(aq) + 2e–
→ 2Ag(s)
Ni(s) → Ni2+(aq) + 2e–
_________________________________________
2Ag+(aq) + 2e– + Ni(s) → 2Ag(s) + Ni2+(aq) + 2e–
Step 4 The electrons on the left-hand side of the
arrow cancel out those on the right-hand
side, leaving the full balanced redox equation.
2Ag+(aq) + 2e– + Ni(s) → 2Ag(s) + Ni2+(aq) + 2e–
_________________________________________
2Ag+(aq) + Ni(s) → 2Ag(s) + Ni2+(aq)
The final equation in the solution to Worked example 3B–5 is an example of a redox
equation that can also be classified as an ionic equation. It shows the species reacting and
their charges and states but does not show the electrons that are being transferred.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
94 CHAPTER 3 GALVANIC CELLS
3A REDUCTION
AND OXIDATION
VIDEO
WORKED
EXAMPLE 3B–6
LINK
Writing balanced half-equations from full redox reactions
Sometimes you may be given an ionic equation, or full redox equation, from which you
need to identify what the half-equations are. This involves applying most of the skills that
you have been looking at in this chapter. You will need to identify the redox couples and
follow the steps to balance each half-equation that were covered in Worked examples 3B–1,
3B–2 and 3B–3.
Worked example 3B–6: Writing half-equations from full equations
Use the following redox reaction to write the two half-reactions. Also identify which
half-reaction is reduction and which is oxidation.
F2(g) + 2Fe2+(aq) → 2F–(aq) + 2Fe3+(aq)
Solution
Logic Process
Step 1 Identify the redox couples and write
each pair on appropriate sides of
the half-equation.
F2(g) + 2Fe2+(aq) → 2F–(aq) + 2Fe3+(aq)
F2 → F–
Fe2+ → Fe3+
Step 2
E
Balance the Elements by adding
coefficients where necessary. Only
the F– ion requires the coefficient
2 in this example.
F2 → 2F–
Fe2+ → Fe3+
Step 3
C
Balance the Charges by adding
electrons to the more positive side
of each half-equation.
F2 + 2e–
→ 2F–
Fe2+ → Fe3+ + e–
Step 4
S
Include States. F2(g) + 2e–
→ 2F–(aq)
Fe2+(aq) → Fe3+(aq) + e–
Step 5 WORKSHEET
3B–1
WRITING
SIMPLE AND
COMPLEX HALF-
EQUATIONS
DOC
Identify which is reduction and
which is oxidation. The simplest way
to do this is to identify on which side
of the half-equation the electrons
are shown. Another method is to use
oxidation numbers.
Reduction (electrons on the left-hand side):
F2(g) + 2e–
→ 2F–(aq)
Oxidation (electrons on right-hand side):
Fe2+(aq) → Fe3+(aq) + e–
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
3B WRITING REDOX eqUATIONS
95
NOTE
There is sometimes a rare case where the reduction and oxidation reactions both result in the
same product being formed. An example of this is shown below.
Pb(s) + PbO2(s) + 4H+(aq) + 2SO4
2–(aq) → 2PbSO4(s) + 2H2O(l)
The redox couples for such a reaction would each have the same product as indicated below.
Pb + PbO2 + 4H+ + 2SO4
2– → 2PbSO4 + 2H2O
Sometimes it is possible for the opposite to happen, where the same species in a redox reaction
acts as both the reducing agent and the oxidising agent. In one half-reaction it would undergo
reduction, and in the other half-reaction it would undergo oxidation. These are uncommon
circumstances but are important to be aware of.
Check-in questions – Set 3
1 Write the full ionic equation by combining the following half-equations.
a Al3+(aq) + 3e–
→ Al(s) and Ca(s) → Ca2+(aq) + 2e–
b O2(g) + 4H+(aq) + 4e–
→ 2H2O(l) and K(s) → K+(aq) + e–
2 Write the reduction and oxidation half-equations for the full redox equations shown,
assuming they take place in acidic conditions. Label each half-equation as either
reduction or oxidation.
a 2H+(aq) + 2Li(s) → 2Li+(aq) + H2(g)
b 2MnO4
–(aq) + 6H+(aq) + 5H2O2(aq) → 2Mn2+(aq) + 8H2O(l) + 5O2(g)
3 Identify the conjugate redox pairs and use these to determine the overall equation for
the following reaction occurring in basic conditions.
MnO4
–(aq) + Zn(s) → MnO2(s) + Zn(OH)4
2–(aq)
3B SKILLS
VIDEO 3B–2
SKILLS: WRITING
BALANCED
EQUATIONS
Key things to check when writing balanced equations
It is important that you are able to write balanced equations, particularly in this section
of the course. Below are a few points to remember that you may find helpful.
1 Never change the subscripted numbers in a formula. This is only done when balancing
the formula of ionic compounds based on the individual charges of the cation and the
anion.
2 Only ever change coefficients to balance elements.
3 A balanced equation must have the same number of each element on both the
reactant and product sides.
4 Charges on both the reactant and product sides must always be the same. One
common mistake is adding electrons to each side of a redox equation to make the
charges equal zero on both sides. Sometimes the charges will be zero, other times
positive or negative. They simply need to be the same on each side.
5 Finally, always make sure that you add states to any equations you write.
Let’s look at an example to apply these rules.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
96 CHAPTER 3 GALVANIC CELLS
In the 1840s, a telegraph system used an early version of an electric primary cell that
consisted of two half-cells, each with an electrode and an aqueous electrolyte, which
were:
• a zinc electrode (Zn) in dilute sulfuric acid solution (H2SO4).
• a platinum electrode (Pt) in concentrated nitric acid (HNO3).
In the nitric acid half-cell, aqueous nitrate ions, NO3
–, were converted into nitrogen
dioxide, NO2.
Write the half-equation for this reaction by following these steps.
1 Write the initial reactant and products without changing the subscripts present
NO3
–
⇌ NO2
2 Balance the elements by following the steps in KOHES, which will change the
coefficients.
NO3
– + 2H+ ⇌ NO2 + H2O
3 Check that the same number of elements is present on both the reactant and product
sides of the equation – which they are.
4 The reactant side of the equation has an overall charge of +1 (–1 + 2), whereas the
product side of the equation has an overall charge of 0. Therefore, balance the charges
by adding electrons to the more positive side, in this case the reactant side (one
­ electron needed).
NO3
– + 2H+ + e– ⇌ NO2 + H2O
5 Make sure that you write a state for each species.
NO3
–(aq) + 2H+(aq) + e– ⇌ NO2(g) + H2O(l)
Section 3B questions
1 Explain the difference between a redox half-equation and a full redox equation.
2 Balance the following half-equations.
a H2(g) → H+(aq)
b Cr3+(aq) → Cr(s)
c Ag(s) → Ag+(aq)
3 Balance the following half-equation using KOHES.
HNO2(aq) → NO3
–(aq)
4 Write the full ionic equation by combining the following half-equations.
a Pb2+(aq) + 2e–
→ Pb(s) and Co(s) → Co2+(aq) + 2e–
b F2(g) + 2e–
→ 2F–(aq) and K(s) → K+(aq) + e–
c Explain the importance of multiplying the potassium, K, half-equation in part b when
determining the overall equation.
5 Write the reduction and oxidation half-equations for the full redox equations shown
below. Label each half-equation as either reduction or oxidation.
a Zn2+(aq) + 2Li(s) → 2Li+(aq) + Zn(s)
b 3C H3CH2OH(aq) + 2Cr2O7
2–(aq) + 16H+(aq) → 4Cr3+(aq) + 11H2O(l) +
3CH3COOH(aq)
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
3B WRITING REDOX eqUATIONS
97
6 For each of the following reactions, write the balanced half-equations, identifying
which is oxidation and which is reduction, as well as writing the overall redox equation.
a I2(s) + H2S(g) → I–(aq) + S(s)
b NO3
–(aq) + H2S(g) → NO(g) + S(s)
c SO3
2–(aq) + MnO4
–(aq) → SO4
2–(aq) + Mn2+(aq)
d Cr2O7
2–(aq) + CH3CH2OH(g) → CH3COOH(g) + Cr3+(aq)
7 When a piece of copper metal is placed into a silver nitrate solution, silver metal is
formed and the solution gradually turns blue, indicating the presence of copper(II) ions
in solution. The oxidation and reduction reactions can be represented by two half-
equations.
Write these half-equations and identify which substances are oxidised and which are
reduced.
8 Form an overall equation by combining the following pair of half-equations:
VO2+(aq) + H2O(l) → VO2
+(aq) + 2H+(aq) + e–
VO2+(aq) + 2H+(aq) + 2e–
→ V2+(aq) + H2O(l)
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
98 CHAPTER 3 GALVANIC CELLS
3C
Features of galvanic cells
Study Design:
• The common design
features and general
operating principles of
non-rechargeable (primary)
galvanic cells converting
chemical energy into
electrical energy, including
electrode polarities and the
role of the electrodes (inert
and reactive) and electrolyte
solutions (details of specific
cells not required)
Glossary:
Anode
Cathode
Chemical energy
Conjugate redox pair
Electrical energy
Electrochemical cell
Electrode
Electrode polarity
Electrolyte
Galvanic cell
Half-cell
Inert
Ion
Primary cell
Salt bridge
Spontaneous reaction
Voltmeter
ENGAGE
Batteries are everywhere!
In a world where technology is advancing and
the number of portable and mobile gadgets
is increasing, have you ever wondered when
batteries were first invented, or what is it about
a battery that makes it possible to provide the
electrical energy to power these devices?
There are many different types of batteries in
use today. Some larger batteries store huge
amounts of power generated by solar farms,
others may be used to power electric cars, while
many are much smaller and can be found in
Figure 3C–1 Italian scientist Alessandro
Volta and his voltaic pile ‘battery’
consisting of alternating silver and
zinc discs
watches and hearing aids. Despite their size
differences, essentially all of them have a similar design enabling a redox chemical
reaction to take place that converts stored chemical energy into usable electrical energy.
American scientist and inventor, Benjamin Franklin, first used the term ‘battery’ in
the mid-1700s but it is believed that the first true battery was made by Italian scientist
Alessandro Volta in 1800. He created a stack of alternating discs of silver and zinc,
separated by cloth soaked in salt water, to generate a current. Since there were
no instruments available to detect weak currents at the time, he tested his batteries by
using his tongue! Volta discovered that changing the types of metals used, as well as
changing the number of discs, had an effect on the amount of current that the battery
could produce.
Another battery that you might already be familiar with is the lead–acid battery, which
was invented in the mid-1800s. It was the first-ever rechargeable battery and is still
commonly used today to provide the electrical energy needed to start cars and other
vehicles. Batteries are examples of galvanic cells, which are central to this section of the
Study Design.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
3C FEATURES OF GALVANIC CELLS
99
EXPLAIN
Electrochemical cells
Electrochemical cells are systems that can convert stored chemical energy into electrical
energy or that can use electrical energy supplied to facilitate chemical reactions. Some can
even do both! In this chapter, we will focus on the former, also referred to as ‘galvanic cells’.
Galvanic cells are one type of electrochemical cell and involve spontaneous redox reactions.
NOTE
It is helpful to recognise that there are a number of interchangeable terms used when discussing
galvanic cells: ‘voltaic cell’, ‘primary cell’ and even the term ‘battery’ may all be used to reference
a galvanic cell. Essentially, they are equivalent in that they refer to an electrochemical cell that
spontaneously produces electrical energy from chemical energy.
Electrochemical
cell
a system where
electrical energy
can be converted to
chemical energy or
vice versa
Chemical energy
energy stored within
the bonds between
atoms
Electrical energy
energy that involves
the flow of electrons
and/or charged
particles
Galvanic cell
a system in which
a spontaneous
redox reaction takes
place, converting
chemical energy to
electrical energy
Spontaneous
reaction
a reaction that
takes place without
the input of external
energy
Energy transformation
Figure 3C–2 shows the spontaneous
redox reaction that occurs when solid
zinc metal, Zn(s), is placed directly
into a solution of copper(II) sulfate
containing copper ions, Cu2+(aq).
The overall redox reaction for this
process is:
Cu2+(aq) + Zn(s) → Cu(s) + Zn2+(aq)
Since the reactants are in direct
contact with each other, when the
reaction takes place, electrons are
exchanged directly in an exothermic
reaction, and chemical energy is
converted into thermal energy, which
is released into the surroundings
as heat.
Figure 3C–2 A piece of solid zinc placed into copper
sulfate solution undergoes a spontaneous exothermic
To be effective in producing electrical
reaction.
energy, galvanic cells are systems
that separate the two reactants instead of allowing them to be in direct contact with one
another. This allows for the transformation of chemical energy into electrical energy that
can be harnessed and used to provide power. Without this separation, a spontaneous
exothermic reaction would still occur, involving a direct exchange of electrons between
the reactants. This would produce heat energy instead of the electrical energy that can be
generated by a galvanic cell.
Primary cell
a type of
electrochemical cell
that spontaneously
produces electrical
energy from
chemical energy;
also referred to as
a voltaic cell or
battery
Check-in questions – Set 1
1 What type of energy transformation takes place when the reactants for a spontaneous
redox reaction are in direct contact with one another?
2 What type of energy transformation takes place when the reactants for a spontaneous
redox reaction are separated from one another in a galvanic cell?
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
100 CHAPTER 3 GALVANIC CELLS
3A REDUCTION
AND OXIDATION
LINK
Features of galvanic cells
Galvanic cells are designed with a number of important features to ensure that electrical
energy can be produced. Figure 3C–3 shows a representation of a specific galvanic cell
called the Daniell cell, which was one of the first galvanic cells, invented by English
chemist John Daniell in 1836. It includes many of the essential features common to all
galvanic cells and is simple enough that you can reproduce it in the laboratory.
Electrochemical cell (Galvanic cell)
V
e– e–
Half-cell
one half of a
galvanic cell
that contains
an electrode
submerged in a
solution of ions
Electrode
solid conducting
material that
can carry
electric current;
a connecting
terminal that
allows current
to flow
Ion
a positively
or negatively
charged atom
that has either
lost or gained
electron(s)
Cathode
the electrode at
which reduction
occurs. In a
galvanic cell,
the cathode is
positive
Anode
the electrode at
which oxidation
occurs. In a
galvanic cell,
the anode is
negative
Electrode
polarity
the positive or
negative charge
associated with
electrodes in an
electrochemical
cell because
of reduction
or oxidation
occurring on
their surface. In
a galvanic cell,
the cathode is
positive and
the anode is
negative
Anode
Zn(s)
– +
Salt bridge
Cathode
Cu(s)
Oxidation
Reduction
Conjugate redox
pair
a reducing
agent and its
corresponding
conjugate
oxidising agent
Zn2+ Cu2+
Zn(s) → Zn2+(aq) + 2e– Cu2+(aq) + 2e–
→ Cu(s)
Figure 3C–3 A simple representation of the Daniell cell invented in 1836 by English
chemist, John Daniell
Half-cells
Galvanic cells are comprised of two half-cells, which must be separated in order to produce
electrical energy. In Figure 3C–3 above, the Daniell cell has two beakers separating the
reactants. Each half-cell contains a solid conducting electrode partially submerged in a
solution of ions. It is on the surface of these electrodes where the reduction and oxidation
reactions take place. From Section 3A, we know that reduction involves a ‘gain’ of electrons,
while oxidation involves the production or ‘loss’ of electrons. In a galvanic cell, the
electrode where reduction occurs is called the cathode, which is also the positive terminal of
the cell. The electrode where oxidation occurs is called the anode, which in a galvanic cell is
also the negative terminal of the cell. The positive or negative ‘charge’ on these electrodes is
more accurately referred to as the electrode polarity.
Electrodes
In Figure 3C–4, solid zinc, Zn(s), is acting as the anode in the oxidation half-cell, which
also contains a solution of zinc ions, Zn2+(aq). Solid copper, Cu(s), is the cathode in the
reduction half-cell, which also contains a solution of copper(II) ions, Cu2+(aq). You might
recognise the species in each half-cell as conjugate redox pairs. Each half-cell contains a
reducing agent and a conjugate oxidising agent. In most galvanic cells, a metal is part of
the conjugate redox pair and is therefore often used as an electrode. When this is the case,
the electrodes are reactive and take part in the redox reactions occurring. During such
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
3C FEATURES OF GALVANIC CELLS
101
reactions, it is possible to observe an increase in mass at the cathode, where ions are
converted to solid metal atoms (reduction occurs). Conversely, at the anode, where metal
atoms are converted into ions, it is possible to observe a decrease in the mass of the metal
electrode being used (oxidation occurs).
1.10
e−
Voltmeter
e−
Zn(s)
anode
Cl—
2Na+
Cu(s)
cathode
Zn2+
Salt bridge,
NaCl(aq)
(−) (+)
Zn2+
Zn2+
Zn2+
NO3
−
Zn2+
NO3
−
Cu2+
1 M Zn(NO3)2(aq) Oxidation half-reaction:
Zn(s) Zn2+(aq) + 2e−
Reduction half-reaction:
Cu2+(aq) + 2e− Cu(s)
Overall reaction: Zn(s) + Cu2+(aq) Zn2+(aq) + Cu(s)
Figure 3C–4 Solid zinc, Zn(s), is acting as the anode and solid copper, Cu(s), is acting as the cathode.
Sometimes the conjugate redox pair in a half-cell does not include a metal, in which case
an inert electrode, such as graphite or platinum, may be used instead. These materials still
conduct electricity, but importantly, are not involved in the actual half-reactions that take
place on their surfaces. A final point worth noting about electrodes is that some half-
cells involving gases, such as hydrogen, oxygen or chlorine, may even have a special ‘gas
electrode’. Where the gas is a product of the reaction, there needs to be a way for the gas to
escape. If the gas is a reactant, however, it is usually necessary for the gas to be bubbled into
the solution surrounding the electrode. Figure 3C–5 shows an electrochemical cell that uses
these gas electrodes.
Cu2+
Cu2+
Cu2+
1 M Cu(NO3)2(aq)
Inert
largely non-
reactive; does
not take part in
a reaction
Figure 3C–5 An electrochemical cell showing a set-up with two gas electrodes
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
102 CHAPTER 3 GALVANIC CELLS
NOTE
Half-cells usually contain the species that react, but it is important to note that it is also possible for
other species that are not involved in the reaction to be present. Sometimes there may be multiple
ions present in a solution, often used to supply the reactive ions to the solution. For example, in the
Daniell cell, the copper ions are supplied by copper(II) sulfate. Sulfate ions, SO4
2– are also present
but would be considered spectator ions as they do not take part in the actual reaction.
Salt bridge
connects the
circuit in a
galvanic cell and
contains ions
that balance the
charges formed
from each
half-cell
Electrolyte
a non-reactive
solution or paste
that enables the
flow of charged
particles
and helps to
facilitate the
redox reactions
The salt bridge
The salt bridge plays three important roles in a galvanic cell:
1 It connects the circuit, allowing for the flow of charged particles through the circuit
2 It allows for the physical separation of half-cells, preventing reactants from coming into
direct contact with each other
3 It is usually soaked in a non-reactive electrolyte solution consisting of cations and anions
that can migrate into the solutions to balance the charges of the reaction occurring in
each half-cell (as shown in Figure 3C–4 with Na+ and Cl– ions).
Without a salt bridge, charge would accumulate in each of the cells and the redox reaction
would soon cease.
Two common electrolytes used in galvanic cells are concentrated potassium nitrate, KNO3,
and concentrated potassium chloride, KCl; however, other substances may also be used,
including sodium sulfate, Na2SO4, and sodium chloride, NaCl. Often the salt bridge is
simply a piece of filter paper soaked in the electrolyte and draped across the two solutions
in each beaker.
Migration of ions from the salt bridge
Consider the redox reactions taking place in the Daniell cell shown in Figure 3C–4.
Reduction at the cathode: Cu2+(aq) + 2e–
→ Cu(s)
Oxidation at the anode: Zn(s) → Zn2+(aq) + 2e–
If we focus on the reduction reaction, we can see that it is using positive cations from the
solution and converting them to neutral solid metal atoms. As a result, those cations are
essentially removed from the solution as they take part in the reaction, so there would start
to be an imbalance between the cations and anions in the solution. To balance the charges,
positively charged cations from the salt bridge migrate into the solution of the reduction
half-cell. For example, if NaCl is the electrolyte solution being used in the cell, it would
be sodium ions, Na+, that migrate towards the cathode. It is important to note that this
‘balancing’ of charge is happening in real-time and that if it did not, the galvanic cell would
cease to function.
Looking at the anode reaction, the opposite is occurring, as solid zinc metal atoms are
oxidised to zinc ions, Zn2+. In this half-cell, the balance of charge in the solution would
start to shift to have more cations than anions, so to balance this change, negatively charged
anions migrate from the salt bridge towards the anode. If NaCl is the electrolyte solution
being used in the cell, it would mean chloride ions, Cl–, perform this function.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
3C FEATURES OF GALVANIC CELLS
103
NOTE
An easy way to remember this movement of ions in the electrolyte (salt) bridge is:
–
anions to the anode
–
cations to the cathode.
As well as observing a change in mass at the cathode and anode, sometimes other
important observations can be made that provide some indication that a reaction is taking
place within a galvanic cell. In some half-cells, gases may be produced in a half-reaction
that result in bubbles forming on the surface of the electrode. Another observation might
be a change in appearance of the solvent used in a half-cell. For example, in the Daniell cell,
the copper(II) sulfate solution has a blue colour. However, as the reaction proceeds and
copper ions in that solution undergo reduction, the concentration of copper ions, Cu2+, will
decrease and the intensity of that blue coloured solution will also decrease over time.
The external circuit
The separation of reactants in a galvanic cell is crucial and allows the electrons produced
by oxidation at the anode to flow to the cathode where they then take part in the reduction
reaction. It is important to recognise that the electrons do not move into the solutions.
Instead, the electrons flow from one electrode to the other via the external circuit, which is
made up of wires connecting the electrodes. In some cell diagrams you may see light globes
used in place of the voltmeter shown in Figure 3C–3 or 3C–4, which would glow when
current flows through the external circuit.
Voltmeter
an instrument
used for
measuring
electrical
potential
NOTE
An important skill is to determine the direction of flow of electrons. Although it should be
possible to work out the direction by looking at the half-equations to see where the electrons
are being used and where they are being produced, another convenient way to remember the
direction is that they travel from the anode to the cathode (A to the C), which is in alphabetical
order.
Check-in questions – Set 2
1 Explain the function of each galvanic cell design feature listed below.
a salt bridge
b electrolyte solution
c electrode
d external circuit
e separated half-cells
2 State the direction of flow for the following particles during a spontaneous reaction
occurring in a galvanic cell.
a anion in the salt bridge solution
b cation in the salt bridge solution
c electron
3 In the Daniell cell shown in Figure 3C–3, predict which electrode would show an
increase in mass and which would show a decrease in mass.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
104 CHAPTER 3 GALVANIC CELLS
Drawing and labelling galvanic cell diagrams
A key skill is being able to use the information about a reaction taking place in a galvanic
cell to draw and/or label key aspects of the cell. This might include:
• writing the half-reactions or overall reaction occurring in the cell
• labelling the anode and cathode
• labelling the polarity of the electrodes
• labelling the direction of electron flow
• labelling the direction of flow of ions from the salt bridge.
Being able to determine many of these characteristics relies on identifying the cathode and
the anode. To assist with this, make use of the galvanic cell mnemonic (memory aid): the
Happy Red Cat.
• Happy corresponds to the positive terminal.
• Red corresponds to reduction.
• Cat corresponds to cathode.
In galvanic cells, these three aspects always combine in the reduction half-cell, so you only
need to identify one of the three aspects to quickly work out the other two. The opposite
holds true for the oxidation half-cell: negative, oxidation and anode.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
3C FEATURES OF GALVANIC CELLS
105
Worked example 3C–1: Identifying the features of a galvanic cell
VIDEO
WORKED
EXAMPLE 3C–1
Draw a copy of the galvanic cell shown below and label the following features.
A: direction of electron flow
B: name of zinc electrode (anode or cathode)
C: polarity of zinc electrode
D: ion migrating from salt bridge
E: name of reaction (reduction or oxidation)
F: name of copper electrode (anode or cathode)
G: polarity of copper electrode
H: ion migrating from salt bridge
I: name of reaction (reduction or oxidation)
e–
A:
B: F:
Salt bridge
KNO3
C:
G:
D: H:
Zn(s) → Zn2+(aq) + 2e– –
Cu2+(aq) + 2e → Cu(s)
E: I:
Solution
Logic Process
Step 1 There is no specific order in which to
approach a question like this, but the
key is to identify what information you
are given and to then try to apply the
‘happy red cat’ mnemonic.
By identifying the reactions shown
for each half-cell, and applying what
we already understand about redox
reactions, we can see the equation
on the left for zinc is producing two
electrons. Therefore, ‘E’ is oxidation.
We can also see that in the half-
reaction on the right the copper ions
are combining with two electrons,
which means that ‘I’ is reduction.
Loss of electrons:
Zn(s) → Zn2+(aq) + 2e–
Therefore, ‘E’ is oxidation.
Gain of electrons:
Cu2+(aq) + 2e–
→ Cu(s)
Therefore, ‘I’ is reduction.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
106 CHAPTER 3 GALVANIC CELLS
Step 2 We can then apply the ‘happy red cat’
to labels F and G.
Happy red cat:
Happy: positive
Red: reduction, which occurs on the
right-hand side.
Cat: cathode must also be on the
right-hand side.
Therefore, ‘F’ is cathode and ‘G’ is
positive.
Step 3 By elimination, this tells us which
terms correspond to labels B and C.
If ‘F’ is the cathode, ‘B’ is the anode
and ‘C’ is negative.
Step 4 The direction of electron flow can now
be determined, as we know electrons
flow from anode to the cathode (A to
the C).
Electrons flow from left to right in
this cell, so an arrow pointing right is
appropriate for ‘A’ on the diagram.
Step 5 For ion flow, we know that anions flow
to the anode and cations flow to the
cathode.
Because KNO3 is shown as the
electrolyte solution, the anions would
be nitrate ions, NO3
–, and the cations
would be potassium ions, K+. We can
now add these species to labels D and
H respectively.
Step 6 Complete the diagram. See below.
e–
A:
B: anode F: cathode
Salt bridge
KNO3
C: negative
G: positive
D: NO3
– H: K+
Zn(s) → Zn2+(aq) + 2e
Cu2+(aq) + 2e → Cu(s)
–
E: oxidation I: reduction
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
3C FEATURES OF GALVANIC CELLS
107
Summarising the design features of galvanic cells
The design features of a galvanic cell play an important role in allowing for the conversion
of chemical energy into usable electrical energy. Table 3C–1 provides a summary of the key
design features of galvanic cells and their importance.
Table 3C–1 Essential features of a galvanic cell
Design feature Function
Two separated
half-cells
Allows for reduction and oxidation reactions to take place without direct
contact between reactants so that electrons are forced to flow through
the external circuit to provide electrical energy
External circuit Consists of the wires connecting electrodes, as well as any device
that is connected for electrons to flow though. Electrons flow from the
anode to the cathode (A to the C).
Salt bridge Allows half-cells to be physically separated. Connects the circuit
allowing for charged particles (ions) to flow; supplies cations and
anions to balance the charges in each half-cell
Electrodes Provide a surface for the reduction and oxidation reactions to take
place on. In most half-cells, they are made from the metal that forms
part of the redox conjugate pair in that half-cell.
Electrolyte solution Non-reactive solution that allows for flow of charge. Anions migrate
towards the anode and cations migrate towards the cathode.
Anode Negative electrode where oxidation half-reaction takes place
Cathode Positive electrode where reduction half-reaction takes place
Check-in questions – Set 3
1 Draw a copy of the galvanic cell below and label the missing features.
a direction of electron flow
b name of each electrode (anode or cathode)
c polarity of each electrode
d ions migrating from salt bridge to each electrode (assume KNO3 is the electrolyte)
e name of each half-reaction (reduction or oxidation)
V
Direction of electron flow
Lead electrode
Silver electrode
Salt bridge (KNO3)
Pb(s) → Pb2+(aq) + 2e– Ag+ + e– → Ag(s)
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
108 CHAPTER 3 GALVANIC CELLS
VIDEO 3C–1
SKILLS:
LABELLING
GALVANIC CELL
DIAGRAMS
3C SKILLS
Labelling galvanic cell diagrams
An important skill as part of this section is that you are able to draw and fully label a
galvanic cell when given the electrode and electrolyte for two half-cells. You should as
part of this be able to include the following information in your labelled diagram:
• relevant half-equations
• the polarity of the electrodes
• direction of electron flow through the wires (Remember: electrons flow away from
the anode: A to C)
• direction and movement of ions from salt bridge (assume KNO3 is being used) –
remember positive ions migrate from the salt bridge to the cathode (+ with +)
• the anode and cathode
• the reducing agent and oxidising agent
• the overall equation
• the cell potential difference (theoretical voltage produced). This is discussed in more
detail in the next section.
Let’s look at an example question to apply all these things you should include.
Question:
A galvanic cell is made up of two half-cells containing the following:
Al3+(aq) / Al(s) and Sn2+(aq) / Sn
Draw a fully labelled diagram for this galvanic cell, including all the points identified
above.
Answer:
e–
e–
V
Anion
(NO3
–)
Cation
(K+)
Aluminium
ANODE
(–)
Tin
CATHODE
(+)
Al3+(aq)
Al3+(aq)
Al(s) → Al3+(aq) + 3e–
OXIDATION
Sn2+(aq)
Sn2+(aq)
Sn2+(aq) + 2e– → Sn(s)
REDUCTION
Section 3C questions
1 State whether the following statements are true or false for galvanic cells. Justify your
response for each.
a Electrons flow through the salt bridge from the anode to the cathode.
b Cations flow from the salt bridge to the cathode.
c Reduction occurs at the cathode.
d Electrical energy is converted to chemical energy.
e The polarity of the anode is negative.
f The cathode can show an increase in mass during a reaction.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
3C FEATURES OF GALVANIC CELLS
109
2 Copy the diagram of the galvanic cell below and label the missing features.
a direction of electron flow
b name of each electrode (anode or cathode)
c polarity of each electrode
d ions migrating from salt bridge to each electrode (assume KNO3 is the electrolyte)
e name of each half-reaction (reduction or oxidation)
V
Direction of electron flow
Lead electrode
Iron electrode
Salt bridge (KNO3)
Pb(s) → Pb2+(aq) + 2e– Fe(s) → Fe2+(aq) + 2e–
3 A galvanic cell consists of one half-cell with a lead electrode placed in an aqueous lead
ion electrolyte, and the other half-cell, which is a standard hydrogen half-cell with
aqueous hydrogen ions.
Draw a fully labelled galvanic cell for this set-up, showing and labelling the following:
•
anode and cathode
•
electrode and electrolyte for each of the half-cells
•
direction of electron flow
•
salt bridge with the direction of ion flow into each half-cell
•
oxidation and corresponding half-equation
•
reduction and corresponding half-equation
•
overall redox equation.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
110 CHAPTER 3 GALVANIC CELLS
3D
Using the electrochemical series
Study Design:
• The use and limitations of the
electrochemical series in designing
galvanic cells and as a tool for predicting
the products of redox reactions, for
deducing overall equations from redox
half-equations and for determining
maximum cell voltage under standard
conditions
Glossary:
Electrochemical series
Potential difference
Standard cell potential
Standard electrode potential
Standard hydrogen electrode
Voltage
ENGAGE
The southern hemisphere’s largest battery is right here in Victoria!
Did you know that, as of 2023, the
largest lithium-ion battery in the
southern hemisphere is located near
Geelong? The Victorian Big Battery
(VBB) stores enough energy to power
more than 1 million homes for 30
minutes. In this section, you will look
at how changing the reactants used
in galvanic cells can have an effect on
the reactions taking place as well as
the amount of electrical energy they
can produce.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
3D USING THE ELECTROCHEMICAL SERIES
111
EXPLAIN
Potential difference
Under the same conditions, the type of reactants being used will influence the amount of
voltage that can be produced by a galvanic cell. The voltage produced is caused by the potential
difference in the amount of energy that the valence electrons have in atoms of different
elements. Electrons flow through the external circuit because of this difference in potential
energy between the two electrodes. More simply, the reactant in one half-cell has a stronger
tendency to move electrons through the circuit compared to the other half-cell. The greater
the difference between the two reactants, the greater the potential voltage the cell will be.
1.10 V 2.62 V
Zn
Cu Salt bridge
Salt bridge Mg Cu
25°C 25°C
Voltage
the amount
of electrical
potential that
exists between
two points
Potential
difference
a difference
in the amount
of energy that
the valence
electrons
have in atoms
of different
reactants used
in galvanic cells.
The greater
the potential
difference,
the greater the
voltage produced
1 M Zn2+(aq) 1 M Cu2+(aq)
1 M Mg2+(aq) 1 M Cu2+(aq)
Figure 3D–1 Two similar galvanic cells. The voltage produced in the Daniell cell on the
left is 1.10 volts compared to the cell on the right, which can produce 2.62 volts under
the same conditions. In the cell on the right, the zinc half-cell has been replaced with a
magnesium half-cell.
On the Daniell cell represented in Figure 3D–1, on the left-hand side, the voltmeter measuring
the flow of electric current moving between the two half-cells shows that 1.10 volts is being
produced. In the cell shown on the right-hand side, the zinc half-cell has been substituted with
a magnesium half-cell. Under the same conditions, the second cell is able to produce 2.62 volts.
This difference is due to magnesium being more reactive and having a greater tendency to
move electrons through the external circuit compared to the zinc half-cell.
Standard electrode potential
Each half-cell has a unique standard electrode potential, which is the amount of voltage it
can produce at standard conditions. For these experiments, standard conditions refers to
a temperature of 25°C (298 K), solvent concentrations of 1 M and a pressure of 100 kPa.
As redox reactions involve both reduction and oxidation occurring simultaneously, it
is not possible to measure the electrode potential of one half-cell without connecting it
to another. Reduction occurs in one half-cell, while oxidation occurs simultaneously in
the other. For this reason, a standard hydrogen electrode has been used to determine the
comparative electrode potentials of other half-reactions – this is then referred to as their
standard electrode potentials.
The standard hydrogen electrode
The value of the standard electrode potential for different half-cells has been experimentally
determined using the standard hydrogen electrode as a reference. To develop the scale,
this half-cell was arbitrarily assigned an electrode potential of 0.00 volts under standard
conditions. Other half-cells were then measured against the standard hydrogen electrode to
Standard
electrode
potential
the amount of
voltage that can
be produced
by a half-cell,
with reference
to the standard
hydrogen
electrode
Standard
hydrogen
electrode
the hydrogen
half-cell
consisting
of hydrogen
gas, H2(g),
and hydrogen
ions, H+(aq).
It is used as
a reference
against which
the standard
electrode
potentials for all
other half-cells
are determined
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
112 CHAPTER 3 GALVANIC CELLS
25°C
H2(g) 100kPa
pressure
Electrochemical
series
series of
reduction half-
cell reactions
and their
corresponding
standard
electrode
potentials
in order of
strongest
oxidising agent
to weakest
oxidising agent
listed on the
left-hand side
Standard cell
potential
the theoretical
amount of
voltage that a
galvanic cell
can produce
under standard
conditions; also
referred to as
electromotive
force (emf)
determine their comparative values. In the standard
hydrogen electrode, hydrogen gas, H2(g), is bubbled
around an inert platinum electrode at a pressure of
100 kPa. As shown in Figure 3D–2, the electrode
sits in an aqueous solution of 1 M H+(aq) ions. The
reaction for the half-cell can be written as:
2H+(aq) + 2e– ⇌ H2(g)
The electrochemical series
Platinum
electrode
The electrochemical series shown in Table 3D–1
on the opposite page is a list of reduction half-
1 M H+(aq)
reactions in order of strongest oxidising agent
to weakest oxidising agent, listed as the species
on the left-hand side of the half-equation. It also
Bubbles
of hydrogen
gas
Figure 3D–2 The standard hydrogen
electrode
includes the standard electrode potential for each
reduction half-reaction. The most positive value is associated with the strongest oxidising
agent, at the top of the table. The electrochemical series allows us to not only predict which
reduction and oxidation reactions will occur in a galvanic cell, but also the magnitude of the
voltage, or standard cell potential, that a particular galvanic cell can produce. This voltage
may also be referred to as electromotive force, or emf, and is measured in volts.
Calculating cell potential
Consider the zinc–nickel galvanic cell
shown on the right in Figure 3D–3.
Oxidation is occurring in the zinc half-
cell, while reduction is occurring in the
nickel half-cell.
???v
S
a
l
t
b
r
i
d
g
e
Zn 298 K
The two half-reactions occurring in the
galvanic cell have been highlighted below
in a small section of the electrochemical
series. It is vital to remember that these
1 M Zn+(aq) are both represented as reduction
reactions, and the electrode potential
shown is the value for the forward
Zn(s) → Zn2+(aq) + 2e– Figure 3D–3 A zinc–nickel cell
reduction half-reaction. This will be the
half-reaction listed highest on the electrochemical series. However, at the anode, oxidation
is taking place, not reduction, so this half-reaction must be reversed. Whenever a reaction
is reversed, the sign for the value of the standard electrode potential must also be reversed.
The oxidation reaction will be the one listed lowest on the electrochemical series, as shown:
Ni
1 M Ni2+(aq)
Ni2+(aq) + 2e– → Ni(s)
Reaction Standard electrode potential (E0)
in volts at 25 °C
Ni2+(aq) + 2e– ⇌ Ni(s) –0.25
Zn2+(aq) + 2e– ⇌ Zn(s) –0.76
With the zinc half-cell reaction reversed, the reactions occurring in the zinc–nickel galvanic
cell can be represented as follows:
Reduction at the cathode: Oxidation at the anode: Ni2+(aq) + 2e–
→ Ni(s) E
0 = –0.25 volts
Zn(s) → Zn2+(aq) + 2e– E
0 = +0.76 volts
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
3D USING THE ELECTROCHEMICAL SERIES
113
Table 3D–1 The electrochemical series
Reaction Standard electrode potential (E0)
in volts at 25°C
F2(g) + 2e– ⇌ 2F–(aq) +2.87
H2O2(aq) + 2H+(aq) + 2e– ⇌ 2H2O(l) +1.77
Au+(aq) + e– ⇌ Au(s) +1.68
Cl2(g) + 2e– ⇌ 2Cl–(aq) +1.36
O2(g) + 4H+(aq) + 4e– ⇌ 2H2O(1) +1.23
Br2(l) + 2e– ⇌ 2Br–(aq) +1.09
Ag+(aq) + e– ⇌ Ag(s) +0.80
Fe3+(aq) + e– ⇌ Fe2+(aq) +0.77
O2(g) + 2H+(aq) + 2e– ⇌ H2O2(aq) +0.68
I2(s) + 2e– ⇌ 2I–(aq) +0.54
O2(g) + 2H2O(l) + 4e– ⇌ 4OH– (aq) +0.40
Cu2+(aq) + 2e– ⇌ Cu(s) +0.34
Sn4+(aq) + 2e– ⇌ Sn2+(aq) +0.15
S(s) + 2H+(aq) + 2e– ⇌ H2S(g) +0.14
2H+(aq) + 2e– ⇌ H2(g) 0.00
Pb2+(aq) + 2e– ⇌ Pb(s) –0.13
Sn2+(aq) + 2e– ⇌ Sn(s) –0.14
Ni2+(aq) + 2e– ⇌ Ni(s) –0.25
Co2+(aq) + 2e– ⇌ Co(s) –0.28
Cd2+(aq) + 2e– ⇌ Cd(s) –0.40
Fe2+(aq) + 2e– ⇌ Fe(s) –0.44
Zn2+(aq) + 2e– ⇌ Zn(s) –0.76
2H2O(l) + 2e– ⇌ H2(g) + 2OH–(aq) –0.83
Mn2+(aq) + 2e– ⇌ Mn(s) –1.18
Al3+(aq) + 3e– ⇌ Al(s) –1.66
Mg2+(aq) + 2e– ⇌ Mg(s) –2.37
Na+(aq) + e– ⇌ Na(s) –2.71
Ca2+(aq) + 2e– ⇌ Ca(s) –2.87
K+(aq) + e– ⇌ K(s) –2.93
Li+(aq) + e– ⇌ Li(s) –3.04
© VCAA 2020 Chemistry Examination Data Book
NOTE
Strong reducing agents:
-
are located towards the bottom and on the right-hand side of the electrochemical series.
-
donate electrons more readily.
-
have weak conjugate oxidising agents.
-
usually undergo oxidation.
Strong oxidising agents:
-
are located towards the top and on the left-hand side of the electrochemical series.
-
accept electrons more readily.
-
have weak conjugate reducing agents.
-
usually undergo reduction.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
114 CHAPTER 3 GALVANIC CELLS
7A
FEATURES OF
ELECTROLYTIC
CELLS
LINK
To determine the overall cell potential, or voltage, that can be produced by the zinc–nickel
cell from page 112 under standard conditions, simply add the two standard electrode
potentials together:
–0.25 + (+0.76) = +0.51 volts
A positive value obtained for the cell potential indicates that the reaction is spontaneous,
which is expected in a galvanic cell. This is useful to remember when performing
calculations of cell potentials. A negative value would mean that the electrochemical cell is
an electrolytic cell, not a galvanic cell. Electrolytic cells are covered further in Section 7A.
NOTE
The values should only be added together if the half-equation and standard electrode potentials
are reversed for the anode half-reaction.
A useful way to calculate the cell potential directly from the electrochemical series, without
reversing equations and values, is to use the following rule:
E
0
cell = E
0
Reduction reaction – E
0
Oxidation reaction
In Figure 3D–3, notice that the reduction half-equation for nickel appears higher up in the
electrochemical series, compared to the oxidation reaction for zinc. This will be true for
ALL galvanic cells. This is another alternative way to remember which electrode potential
should be subtracted from the other when calculating cell potentials in galvanic cells, as in
the following rule:
E
0
cell = E
0
Higher half-reaction – E
0
Lower half-reaction
NOTE
As well as stressing the importance of always including units, it is essential to note that the value
for cell potential is directional, and the positive or negative sign must always be written in front
of the value to indicate this.
VIDEO
WORKED
EXAMPLE 3D–1
Worked example 3D–1: Calculating the standard cell potential for a galvanic cell
Calculate the standard cell potential for the galvanic cell consisting of a Sn(s)/Sn2+(aq)
half-cell and a Fe(s)/Fe2+(aq) half-cell.
Solution
Logic Process
Step 1 Identify the two relevant half-reactions
in the electrochemical series.
Referring to Table 3D–1:
Sn(s)/Sn2+(aq): –0.14
Fe(s)/Fe2+(aq): –0.44
Step 2 Recall that the top reaction will
proceed in the forwards direction, as
reduction. The bottom reaction will
occur in reverse, as oxidation.
Substitute the values into the equation.
E
0
cell = E 0
Reduction reaction – E 0
Oxidation reaction
E
0
cell = –0.14 – (–0.44) = +0.30
Step 3 Write the cell potential value, making
sure to include units (volts).
+0.30 volts
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
3D USING THE ELECTROCHEMICAL SERIES
115
Check-in questions – Set 1
1 Explain the difference between standard cell potential and standard electrode potential.
2 Using the electrochemical series shown below, identify which of the labelled species (in
red text and with the asterisk next to them) is:
a the strongest oxidising agent
b the weakest oxidising agent
c the strongest reducing agent
d the weakest reducing agent.
Reaction Standard electrode potential (E
0)
in volts at 25°C
F2(g) + 2e– ⇌ 2F–(aq) +2.87
H2O2(aq) + 2H+(aq) + 2e– ⇌ 2H2O(l) +1.77
* Au+(aq) + e– ⇌ Au(s) +1.68
Cl2(g) + 2e– ⇌ 2Cl–(aq) +1.36
O2(g) + 4H+(aq) + 4e– ⇌ 2H2O(1) +1.23
Br2(l) + 2e– ⇌ 2Br–(aq) +1.09
* Ag+(aq) + e– ⇌ Ag(s) +0.80
Fe3+(aq) + e– ⇌ Fe2+(aq) +0.77
O2(g) + 2H+(aq) + 2e– ⇌ H2O2(aq) +0.68
I2(s) + 2e– ⇌ 2I–(aq) +0.54
O2(g) + 2H2O(l) + 4e– ⇌ 4OH– (aq) +0.40
* Cu2+(aq) + 2e– ⇌ Cu(s) +0.34
Sn4+(aq) + 2e– ⇌ Sn2+(aq) +0.15
S(s) + 2H+(aq) + 2e– ⇌ H2S(g) +0.14
2H+(aq) + 2e– ⇌ H2(g) 0.00
Pb2+(aq) + 2e– ⇌ Pb(s) –0.13
3 Calculate the standard cell potential using the electrochemical series for a galvanic cell
consisting of Au+(aq)/Au(s) and Ag+(aq)/Ag(s) half-cells.
Predicting redox reactions in galvanic cells
The electrochemical series can be used to help identify whether a reaction will occur
spontaneously. For a reaction to occur, the oxidising agent must be located higher on the
left-hand side of the series, compared to the reducing agent, which must be located lower
and on the right-hand side of the series. If the species are not positioned in this way, no
reaction will occur.
Worked example 3D–2: Predicting whether a redox reaction will occur
VIDEO
WORKED
EXAMPLE 3D–2
Consider the following three equations that appear in the same order in the
electrochemical series:
Pb2+(aq) + 2e– ⇌ Pb(s) E0 = –0.13V
Ni2+(aq) + 2e– ⇌ Ni(s) E0 = –0.25V
Cd2+(aq) + 2e– ⇌ Cd(s) E0 = –0.40V
Predict whether a reaction will occur between the following species.
a Pb2+(aq) and Cd(s)
b Pb2+(aq) and Cd2+(aq)
c Ni2+(aq) and Pb(s)
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
116 CHAPTER 3 GALVANIC CELLS
Solution
a Pb2+(aq) is the oxidising agent, as it is the species highest on the left-hand side and
Cd(s) is the reducing agent, as it is located lower on the right-hand side. As such they
will undergo a spontaneous reaction.
b No reaction will occur, since both species are oxidising agents and are both located
on the left-hand side of the electrochemical series.
c No reaction will occur, since Ni2+(aq), as the oxidising agent on the left-hand side is
lower than Pb2+(aq), which is the reducing agent, located higher on the right-hand side.
Identifying reactions using the
electrochemical series
The half-equations occurring in a galvanic cell are
not always provided. However, if all the species
present are known, the electrochemical series can
be used to identify the half-reactions occurring, to
then determine the overall redox reaction and to
calculate the cell potential for a given combination
of reactants. On the electrochemical series, the
species that is highest on the left-hand side of the
electrochemical series will undergo reduction.
The species that is lowest on the right-hand side
will undergo oxidation, meaning the reaction on
the electrochemical series for this half-reaction
must be written in reverse.
Oxidising
agent
is reduced
reacts with
is oxidised
Reducing
agent
Figure 3D–4 On the electrochemical series,
a spontaneous redox reaction takes place
between the oxidising agent located higher
on the left-hand side and the reducing
agent located lower on the right-hand side.
VIDEO
WORKED
EXAMPLE 3D–3
Worked example 3D–3: Identifying reactions using the electrochemical series
Consider a galvanic cell consisting of a Ag(s)/Ag+(aq) half-cell and a Pb(s)/Pb2+(aq)
half-cell.
a Identify the strongest reducing agent and oxidising agent.
b Write the half-reactions occurring at the anode and cathode.
c Calculate the standard cell potential.
d Write the overall equation for the cell.
Solution
Logic Process
Step 1 Use the electrochemical series to
highlight the four species present.
Ag+(aq) + e– ⇌ Ag(s) Pb2+(aq) + 2e– ⇌ Pb(s) E 0 = +0.80
E 0 = –0.13
Step 2 The species highest on the left-hand
side will be the strongest oxidising
agent, and as such will undergo
reduction. In this example, silver
ions, Ag+ are the strongest oxidising
agent. The species lowest on the
right-hand side will be strongest
reducing agent, and as such will
undergo oxidation. In this example,
solid lead, Pb(s) is the strongest
reducing agent.
a Strongest oxidising agent: Ag+(aq)
Strongest reducing agent: Pb(s)
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
3D USING THE ELECTROCHEMICAL SERIES
117
Step 3 Write the equations for reduction and
oxidation, remembering to reverse
the oxidation reaction, which is the
lower of the two. It is important to
note the use of correct arrows when
writing these half-equations. The
electrochemical series represents
each reduction half-equation with
equilibrium arrows because it can be
reversed, depending on what else it is
reacting with. However, when writing
half-equations for a particular cell, a
critical part of what we are predicting is
the direction in which these reactions
will occur, and hence the use of a solid
forward arrow is appropriate.
b Ag+(aq) + e–
E 0 = +0.80
→ Ag(s)
Pb(s) → Pb2+(aq) + 2e–
E 0 = +0.13
Step 4 To determine the cell potential, the
values in Step 3 can be added,
since the oxidation reaction and its
standard electrode potential have
been reversed.
Alternatively, the values can be
substituted straight into the following
equation from the electrochemical
series.
c +0.80 + (+0.13) = +0.93 volts
E 0
cell = E 0
Reduction reaction – E 0
Oxidation reaction
E 0
cell = +0.80 – (–0.13) = +0.93 volts
Step 5 Write the overall equation by
balancing electrons and combining
the half-equations. In this example,
there are two electrons in the oxidation
half-equation but only one electron
in the reduction half-equation, which
consequently needs to be doubled.
Now that the number of electrons is
the same on each side, the electrons
can be cancelled to leave the full
redox equation.
2 × (Ag+(aq) + e–
→ Ag(s))
2Ag+(aq) + 2e–
→ 2Ag(s)
Pb(s) → Pb2+(aq) + 2e–
2Ag+(aq) + Pb(s) → 2Ag(s) + Pb2+(aq)
Step 6 Add the cell potential value to the
overall equation, making sure to
include units (volts).
d 2Ag+(aq) + Pb(s) → 2Ag(s) + Pb2+(aq)
E0 = +0.93 volts
NOTE
The standard electrode potential indicates the potential for a reaction to occur – it is never
multiplied when calculating cell potentials.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
118 CHAPTER 3 GALVANIC CELLS
Check-in questions – Set 2
1 Consider the four reactions highlighted in the electrochemical series:
Reaction Standard electrode potential (E
0) in volts at 25°C
Ni2+(aq) + 2e– ⇌ Ni(s) –0.25
Fe2+(aq) + 2e– ⇌ Fe(s) –0.44
Mn2+(aq) + 2e– ⇌ Mn(s) –1.18
Mg2+(aq) + 2e– ⇌ Mg(s) –2.37
Predict whether a spontaneous reaction would occur between the following species.
a Mn2+(aq) and Mg(s)
d Fe2+(aq) and Ni(s)
b Mg2+(aq) and Fe(s)
e Fe(s) and Mn(s)
c Ni2+(aq) and Mn(s)
2 Consider a galvanic cell consisting of a Co(s)/Co2+(aq) half-cell and a Al(s)/Al3+(aq)
half-cell.
a Identify the strongest reducing agent and oxidising agent.
b Write the half-reactions occurring at the anode and cathode.
c Calculate the standard cell potential.
d Write the overall equation for the cell.
5B
FACTORS
AFFECTING
REACTION RATE
LINK
UNIT 2
LINK
Limitations of the electrochemical series
Recall that the electrochemical series was derived using standard laboratory conditions. This
means that unpredictable things may occur when a galvanic cell is placed under conditions
that vary significantly from SLC. Sometimes a different reaction may take place, or there may
in fact be no reaction at all, even if a reaction is predicted to occur spontaneously. Changing
the temperature from 25°C or using solutions that have a concentration different to 1 M, may
result in different reactions taking place. The increased concentration of one particular ion
may mean that it reacts instead of the ions predicted on the electrochemical series. This can
be seen when the electrode potential values, E0, are close together.
One final consideration is that the electrochemical series does not provide any indication
of the reaction rate. Sometimes reactions may be predicted to occur, but they may do so
very slowly. Sometimes reactions may be taking place at such a slow rate that they appear
not to react, even though the electrochemical series predicts that a reaction is taking place.
For example, observing a galvanic cell for 20 minutes may not be sufficient time to observe
products of reactions being formed or other changes expected in the half-cells. You will
study rates of reaction more in Section 5B.
Sometimes, as well as the same species appearing in multiple positions on the electrochemical
series, some half-reactions may also include multiple species. Two examples of this are
shown below where there are hydrogen ions, H+(aq) shown as part of the half-reaction. This
indicates that for the reaction to proceed, there must also be a suitable supply of hydrogen
ions, which would usually mean using an acidic solution. It is important to consider all species
when predicting whether reactions will occur, but also when predicting what the products of
a particular galvanic cell may be. Measuring pH changes or using acid–base indicators may be
one additional way to detect whether a reaction is taking place.
Table 3D–2 Examples of half-reactions with multiple species
Reaction Standard electrode potential (E
0) in volts at 25°C
H2O2(aq) + 2H+(aq) + 2e– ⇌ 2H2O(l) +1.77
O2(g) + 4H+(aq) + 4e– ⇌ 2H2O(l) +1.23
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
3D USING THE ELECTROCHEMICAL SERIES
119
3D SKILLS
Predicting reactions with more than one type of ion present
In some galvanic cells, electrodes can be inert, in which case they are not considered
when trying to predict the reactions occurring. Similarly, solutions in each half-cell
may contain more than one type of reactive ion. In such cases, it is important to
VIDEO 3D–1
SKILLS:
PREDICTING
REACTIONS WITH
MORE THAN ONE
TYPE OF ION
PRESENT
remember redox reactions will only occur between the strongest oxidising agent in the
reduction half-cell and the strongest reducing agent in the oxidation half-cell. If there are many ion species
present, only two will react, and the rest will be considered to be spectator ions.
Some species appear more than once on the electrochemical series on both the left-hand side and right-
hand side of the series. When predicting reactions, all occurrences of each species must be considered to
accurately identify the strongest reducing agent and strongest oxidising agent.
Further consideration should also be given regarding what would happen in a galvanic cell where one of
these ions is completely used up by the reaction. If one completely reacts, the next strongest species will
start to react, provided there is another species available. There would be a decrease in the amount of
voltage produced, but it is important to recognise that whenever other species are present, the reaction
may not simply ‘stop’.
The example below highlights a type of question where more than one type of ion is present, as well as the
worked solution for this example.
Question
A galvanic cell consists of one half-cell with an inert platinum, Pt(s), electrode in a 1 M solution of
Cu2+(aq), Zn2+(aq) and Ni2+(aq) ions. The other half-cell has a solid iron electrode, Fe(s), in a 1 M solution
containing iron(II) ions, Fe2+(aq).
a Identify the strongest reducing agent and oxidising agent.
b State which electrode is the anode, and which is the cathode.
c Write the half-reactions occurring initially at the anode and cathode.
d Calculate the standard cell potential.
e Explain what you would expect to observe at the cathode over time.
Solution
Logic Process
Step 1 Use the electrochemical series to
highlight all the reactive species
present. It is often useful to highlight
the species present in one half-cell
differently from those in the other.
This can make it easier to identify
the reduction and oxidation
reactions that will take place.
The species highest on the left-hand
side of a reaction arrow will be the
strongest oxidising agent.
The species lowest on the right-
hand side of a reaction arrow will be
the strongest reducing agent.
Ag+(aq) + e– ⇌ Ag(s) +0.80 Pb2+(aq) + 2e– ⇌ Pb(s) –0.13
Fe3+(aq) + e– ⇌ Fe2+(aq) +0.77 Sn2+(aq) + 2e– ⇌ Sn(s) –0.14
–0.25
I2(s) + 2e– ⇌ 2I–(aq) +0.54 Co2+(aq) + 2e– ⇌ Co(s) –0.28
–0.40
O2(g) + 2H+(aq) + 2e– ⇌
H2O2(aq)
O2(g) + 2H2O(l) + 4e– ⇌
4OH– (aq)
+0.68 +0.40 S(s) + 2H+(aq) + 2e– ⇌ H2S(g) 2H+(aq) + 2e– ⇌ H2(g) +0.14 Ni2+(aq) + 2e– ⇌ Ni(s) Cd2+(aq) + 2e– ⇌ Cd(s) 2H2O(l) + 2e– ⇌ H2(g) + 2OH–(aq) –0.83
Cu2+(aq) + 2e– ⇌ Cu(s) +0.34 Fe2+(aq) + 2e– ⇌ Fe(s) –0.44
Sn4+(aq) + 2e– ⇌ Sn2+(aq) +0.15 Zn2+(aq) + 2e– ⇌ Zn(s) –0.76
0.00
a strongest oxidising agent: Cu2+(aq)
strongest reducing agent: Fe(s)
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
120 CHAPTER 3 GALVANIC CELLS
Step 2 To identify the cathode, apply the
‘happy red cat’. Given that the iron
electrode is the strongest reducing
agent, undergoing oxidation, it
must be the anode. Therefore, the
strongest oxidising agent, copper
ions undergo reduction in the other
half-cell, where platinum is the
electrode, the cathode must be
platinum.
b Anode: Fe(s)
Cathode: Pt(s)
Step 3 Having identified the strongest
oxidising agent, Cu2+(aq) and
strongest reducing agent, Fe(s),
use the electrochemical series
to write the equations for each
species, remembering to reverse the
oxidation reaction, being the lower
of the two.
c Reduction: Cu2+(aq) + 2e–
→ Cu(s)
Oxidation: Fe(s) → Fe2+(aq) + 2e–
Step 4 Substitute the values straight into
the following equation from the
electrochemical series.
d E
0
cell = E
0
Reduction reaction – E
0
Oxidation reaction
E
0
cell = +0.34 – (–0.44) = +0.78 volts
Step 5 Write your explanation of what
you would expect, given the cell
potential.
e At the cathode:
Initially copper ions, Cu2+(aq) would be reduced to solid
copper, Cu(s). This would appear as a thin coating on
the surface of the platinum electrode. The mass of the
electrode would be increasing. Over time, all the copper
ions may react. At this point, the next strongest oxidising
agent present in the half-cell solution would be nickel
ions, Ni2+(aq), which would be reduced to solid nickel,
Ni(s). This would create another thin layer on the platinum
electrode, over the top of the copper layer and would result
in a further increase in mass of the electrode. During this
time, the cell potential would be reduced to +0.19 volts.
E
0
cell = –0.25 – (–0.44) = +0.19 volts
Once all of the nickel ions have reacted, the reaction would cease to produce any electrical energy since the
remaining ions at the cathode are zinc ions, Zn2+(aq), and these occur lower on the electrochemical series
than the strongest reducing agent, which is still Fe(s).
Section 3D questions
1 A galvanic cell consists of Cu2+(aq)/Cu(s) and Sn2+(aq)/Sn(s) half-cells.
a Write the reduction and oxidation half-equations.
b Write the overall cell equation.
c Calculate the standard cell potential.
d Identify which half-cell is the cathode, and which is the anode.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
3D USING THE ELECTROCHEMICAL SERIES
121
2 Draw a labelled diagram of a galvanic cell made from a hydrogen half-cell, H+(aq)/H2(g)
and a zinc half-cell, Zn2+(aq)/Zn(s) with a salt bridge soaked in KNO3. Include:
a half-reactions for each half-cell
b anode and cathode
c polarity of each electrode
d direction of electron flow
e direction of cation and anion flow
f overall reaction
g cell potential.
3 State whether the following reactions would take place. For those where there is a
reaction, write the balanced equation.
a silver ions, Ag+(aq), being mixed into a 1 M solution of hydrogen peroxide, H2O2
b copper ions, Cu2+(aq), being mixed into a 1 M solution of hydrogen peroxide, H2O2
c chlorine gas, Cl2(g), being bubbled through a 1 M solution of hydrogen
peroxide, H2O2
d solid copper placed into a 1 M solution of hydrogen peroxide, H2O2.
4 A galvanic cell consists of one half-cell with an inert carbon C(s) electrode with a 1 M
solution of Pb2+(aq), Sn2+(aq) and Co2+(aq) ions. The other half-cell has a solid zinc
electrode, Zn(s), in a 1 M solution containing zinc ions, Zn2+(aq).
a Identify the strongest reducing agent and oxidising agent.
b State which electrode is the anode, and which is the cathode.
c Write the half-reactions occurring initially at the anode and cathode.
d Calculate the standard cell potential.
e Explain what you would expect to observe at the cathode over time.
5 A student uses the electrochemical series to create a galvanic cell in their school
laboratory that is predicted to undergo a spontaneous reaction. Suggest two reasons why
they may not observe any changes, even after several minutes.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
122
Chapter 3 review
Summary
Create your own set of summary notes for this chapter, on paper or in a digital document. A model
summary is provided in the Teacher Resources and can be used to compare with yours.
Checklist
In the Interactive Textbook, the success criteria are linked from the review questions and will be
automatically ticked when answers are correct. Alternatively, print or photocopy this page and tick
the boxes when you have answered the corresponding questions correctly.
Success criteria – I am now able to: Linked questions
3A.1 3A.3 3A.4  Define ‘redox’ in terms of reduction, oxidation and electron transfer 3A.2  Explain what a redox reaction involves  Define and identify ‘reducing agent’ and ‘oxidising agent’  Assign oxidation numbers to elements in compounds and ions in
chemical equations and use these numbers to identify reactions
as redox
3A.5 3B.1  Use oxidation numbers to identify conjugate redox pairs  Write and balance simple and complex half-equations for oxidation
and reduction reactions
3B.2  Write and balance overall redox equations, including states, in
acidic conditions
3B.3  Write and balance overall redox equations, including states, in
basic conditions
3B.4  Write and balance half-equations by identifying redox couples in
overall equations
3C.1  Recall and explain the importance of the key design features of
galvanic cells
3C.2 3C.3  Identify, name, draw and label features of galvanic cells  Identify the chemical processes involved in primary galvanic cells,
including the type of redox reaction occurring at each electrode
3C.4 3C.5  Identify the direction of electron flow and ion flow in galvanic cells  Write the half-equation for the reaction occurring at each electrode
in a galvanic cell
3C.6 3C.7  Write the overall equation for a galvanic cell  Describe the importance of separating two half-cells to facilitate
the transformation of chemical energy to electrical energy in a
galvanic cell
3C.8  Explain the role of inert and reactive electrodes and electrolyte
solutions in the reactions taking place in a galvanic cell
3D.1  Apply information presented in the electrochemical series
to questions
18☐
18☐
18☐
18☐
18☐
18☐
19☐
19☐
18☐
11☐
6☐, 13☐
1☐
2☐, 7☐
16☐
17☐
12☐
14☐
8☐, 14☐
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
123
3D.2 3D.3 3D.4 3D.5  Predict whether certain combinations of reactants will produce
electrical energy in a galvanic cell
 Compare the relative strengths of reducing agents and
oxidising agents
 Predict the products, and therefore the overall equation, of a redox
reaction in a galvanic cell
 Use the electrochemical series to calculate the maximum cell voltage
generated under standard laboratory conditions
3☐, 4☐
10☐
8☐
5☐, 9☐, 15☐
Multiple-choice questions
1 Identify the correct statement. In a galvanic cell
A cations flow from the salt bridge to the anode.
B electrons are produced at the cathode.
C oxidation occurs at the cathode.
D chemical energy is converted to electrical energy.
2 Identify the incorrect statement. In a galvanic cell
A reduction occurs at the cathode.
B cations flow from the salt bridge to the cathode.
C electrons flow from the cathode to the anode.
D the polarity of the anode is negative.
3 Which of the following combinations would not react?
A cadmium ions, Cd2+(aq), and solid iron, Fe(s)
B calcium ions, Ca2+(aq), and solid iron, Fe(s)
C cobalt ions, Co2+(aq), and solid iron, Fe(s)
D copper ions, Cu2+(aq), and solid iron, Fe(s)
4 Identify which one of the following would react with solid iron, Fe(s), but not react with solid
lead, Pb(s).
A nickel ions, Ni2+(aq)
B aluminium ions, Al3+(aq)
C copper ions, Cu2+(aq)
D chlorine gas, Cl2(g)
5 What is the standard cell potential when an iron half-cell (Fe3+(aq)/Fe2+(aq)) is connected to a
chlorine half-cell (Cl2(g)/Cl–(aq))?
A –0.59 volts
B +2.13 volts
C +0.59 volts
D +0.18 volts
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
124
6 Select the correct statement for the galvanic cell shown below.
A
Salt bridge
Fe electrode Fe electrode
1 M Fe(NO3)2 1 M AgNO3
A Electrons flow from the Ag electrode to the Fe electrode.
B The mass of the Ag electrode increases.
C The Ag electrode will be the anode.
D The polarity of the Fe electrode is positive.
7 In a galvanic cell, the flow of electrons is from the
A reducing agent to the oxidising agent through the salt bridge.
B oxidising agent to the reducing agent through the salt bridge.
C anode to the cathode through the external circuit.
D cathode to the anode through the external circuit.
8 Some galvanic cells are made using four half-cells (W/W2+, X/X2+, Y/Y2+ and Z/Z2+) set up
under standard conditions. Using the information about the combinations shown, what is the
order of cell potential, E0, in order from highest to lowest?
X(s) + W2+(aq) → X2+(aq) + W(s)
Z(s) + X2+(aq) → No Reaction
Y(s) + Z2+(aq) → No Reaction
W(s) + Z2+(aq) → W2+(aq) + Z(s)
A Y > Z > W > X
B X > Z > W > Y
C Y > W > Z > X
D X > W > Z > Y
9 A galvanic cell potential consists of two connected half-cells. Identify which combination below
would be expected to result in a cell potential of 1.08 V.
A Ni electrode with Ni(NO3)2 Al electrode with Al(NO3)3
B Al electrode with Al(NO3)3 Ag electrode with AgNO3
C Co electrode with Co(NO3)2 Ag electrode with AgNO3
D Ni electrode with Ni(NO3)2 Co electrode with Co(NO3)2
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
125
10 The diagrams below show combinations of galvanic cells made from four half-cells (W/W2+
,
X/X2+, Y/Y2+ and Z/Z2+) set up under standard conditions. Use the polarity of each electrode
shown to identify the order of half-cells, from highest E0 value to the lowest.
A A
– +
– +
Salt bridge
Salt bridge Salt bridge
W(s) X(s)
Z(s) Y(s)
W2+(aq) X2+(aq)
Z2+(aq) Y2+(aq)
A
– +
Salt bridge
Salt bridge
Y(s) W(s)
Y2+(aq) W2+(aq)
A W2+/W, X2+/X, Y2+/Y, Z2+/Z
B X2+/X, W2+/W, Y2+/Y, Z2+/Z
C Z2+/Z, Y2+/Y, X2+/X, W2+/W
D X2+/X, Y2+/Y, Z2+/Z, W2+/W
Short-answer questions
11 Explain the difference between the internal and external circuit of a galvanic cell. (2 marks)
12 In a galvanic cell, one of the key design features is the separation of half-cells.
a Explain the importance of this separation in terms of energy conversions. b Explain the role of the salt bridge in allowing for the separation of half-cells. (2 marks)
(2 marks)
13 Draw a diagram of the galvanic cell containing a chlorine half-cell (Cl2(g)/Cl–(aq)) and a copper
half-cell (Cu2+(aq)/Cu(s)). Chlorine gas is supplied to the electrode.
a On your diagram, label the following: (6 marks)
•
anode and cathode
•
polarity of each electrode
•
direction of electron flow
•
direction of ion flow from the salt bridge (assuming KCl is the electrolyte).
b Write the half-reaction occurring at the anode and cathode. c Write the overall equation. d Calculate the cell potential. (2 marks)
(1 mark)
(1 mark)
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
126
14 Zinc strips are placed into 1 M solutions of Cu(NO3)2, Al(NO3)3, Pb(NO3)2 and Mg(NO3)2.
Using the electrochemical series, predict which solutions would result in a different metal
coating being deposited on the surface of the zinc strip. (2 marks)
Cu2+(aq) + 2e– ⇌ Cu(s) +0.34 Cd2+(aq) + 2e– ⇌ Cd(s) –0.40
Sn4+(aq) + 2e– ⇌ Sn2+(aq) +0.15 Fe2+(aq) + 2e– ⇌ Fe(s) –0.44
S(s) + 2H+(aq) + 2e– ⇌ H2S(g) +0.14 2H+(aq) + 2e– ⇌ H2(g) 0.00 Sn2+(aq) + 2e– ⇌ Sn(s) –0.14 Al3+(aq) + 3e– ⇌ Al(s) –1.66
2H2O(l) + 2e– ⇌ H2(g) + 2OH–(aq) Co2+(aq) + 2e– ⇌ Co(s) Pb2+(aq) + 2e– ⇌ Pb(s) –0.13 Mn2+(aq) + 2e– ⇌ Mn(s) –1.18
Ni2+(aq) + 2e– ⇌ Ni(s) –0.25 Mg2+(aq) + 2e– ⇌ Mg(s) –2.37
Zn2+(aq) + 2e– ⇌ Zn(s) –0.28
–0.76
–0.83
15 Consider the different combinations of four unknown species, W, X, Y and Z, and their
respective ions shown in the three equations below.
X2+(aq) + Y(s) → Y2+(aq) + X(s)
W2+(aq) + X(s) → W(s) + X2+(aq)
Z2+(aq) + W(s) → Z(s) + W2+(aq)
a Identify the relative position of each species on the electrochemical series ordering them
from highest E0 value to lowest. (3 marks)
b State which of the species listed is the strongest reducing agent and which is the strongest
oxidising agent. (2 marks)
16 A representation of the Daniell cell is shown below.
V
Direction of electron flow
Zn electrode Cu electrode
Salt bridge
1.0 M Zn2+(aq) 1.0 M Cu2+(aq)
a State two features of this cell that allow chemical energy to be converted to usable
electrical energy. (2 marks)
b State the polarity of each electrode. c State which electrode is the cathode. d Write the half-equation for the reaction occurring at the cathode. e State the direction of electron flow. (1 mark)
(1 mark)
(1 mark)
(1 mark)
f The electrolyte used in the salt bridge is KNO3. State which ion would migrate
to the anode. (1 mark)
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
127
g Calculate the cell potential using the electrochemical series. (1 mark)
h List two visible changes that you expect to observe after the cell has been operating
for some time. (2 marks)
17 The diagram below shows an incomplete galvanic cell.
Mg (s) Ag (s)
MgSO4(aq) AgNO3(aq)
a Identify the missing component in this cell diagram. b Determine whether electrons travel towards the magnesium or silver electrode. c Write the half-equations occurring in each half-cell. d Write the overall reaction occurring in the cell. e Calculate the standard cell potential. (1 mark)
(1 mark)
(2 marks)
(2 marks)
(1 mark)
18 Look at the following reaction between iron(III) oxide and carbon monoxide:
Fe2O3(s) + 3CO(g) → 2Fe(s) + 3CO2(g)
a Rewrite the reaction above in your workbook, then assign oxidation numbers to
each of the elements present in the reaction. (1 mark)
b Using the terms ‘redox’, ‘reduction’, ‘oxidation’ and ‘electron transfer’, explain
why this reaction is an example of a redox reaction. c Identify both the reducing agent and oxidising agent in this reaction. (4 marks)
(2 marks)
d Write balanced half-equations for the reduction and oxidation reactions
occurring. (2 marks)
19 The following chemical equation shows the redox reaction between solutions of
sulfite ions and permanganate ions.
SO3
2–(aq) + MnO4
–(aq) → SO4
2–(aq) + Mn2+(aq)
a Write the half-equations and the balanced overall equation for this redox reaction
under acidic conditions. (3 marks)
b Write the reduction half-equation for the conversion of permanganate ions into
manganese ions under alkaline (basic) conditions. (1 mark)
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
128
UNIT
3
HOW CAN DESIGN AND INNOVATION HELP TO
OPTIMISE CHEMICAL PROCESSES?
CHAPTER
4
FUEL CELLS
Introduction
Fuel cells are already used to provide clean, quiet and efficient energy and are
likely to continue to be developed further as a means of meeting our future
energy needs. Globally, there are rockets, buses and cars already using fuel
cells to power them. It is likely that this means of energy production will
become more prominent, as fossil fuels are phased out and technology continues to
develop, allowing for cheaper, more sustainable and renewable ways to generate the
reactants used in fuel cells. In this chapter, you will discover how fuel cells operate and
explore many of the key design features that allow for efficient and safe storage, as well
as how they are a key component in helping to meet the future energy needs of society.
Curriculum
Area of Study 1 Outcome 1
What are the current and future options for supplying energy?
Study Design: INTRODUCTION
VIDEO
FUEL CELLS
Learning intentions – at the end of the
chapter I will be able to:
• The common design features and general
operating principles of fuel cells, including
the use of porous electrodes for gaseous
reactants to increase cell efficiency (details
of specific cells not required)
• Contemporary responses to challenges and
the role of innovation in the design of fuel
cells to meet society’s energy needs, with
reference to green chemistry principles:
design for energy efficiency and use of
renewable feedstocks
4A Fuel cells
4A.1  Compare the similarities and
differences between galvanic cells and
fuel cells
4A.2
 Identify and describe the common
design features of fuel cells
4A.3  Explain the importance of key design
features in terms of reaction efficiency
4A.4
 Describe green chemistry principles
that enhance the sustainability of fuel
cells, including the use of renewable
feedstocks
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
129
Study Design: Learning intentions – at the end of the
chapter I will be able to:
•
The application of Faraday’s Laws and
stoichiometry to determine the quantity of
galvanic or fuel cell reactant and product,
and the current or time required to either
use a particular quantity of reactant or
produce a particular quantity of product
4B Faraday’s laws
4B.1  Determine the stoichiometric
relationship between the quantity of
reactant or product and electrons
represented by half-equations in the
electrochemical series
4B.2  Calculate the amount of current or
time required for a galvanic or fuel cell
to produce a given amount of electric
charge using Faraday’s laws equations
4B.3  Calculate the amount of reactant used
or product formed during reactions
occurring in a galvanic or fuel cell
using Faraday’s laws equations
VCE Chemistry Study Design extracts © VCAA; reproduced by permission.
Glossary
Ampere
Biogas
Biomass
Catalytic electrode
Coulomb
Current
Electric charge
Faraday’s constant
Fuel cell
Gasification
Porous electrode
Renewable feedstock
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
130 CONCEPT MAP
Concept map
4A Fuel cells
Features of fuel cells and
sustainability and environmental
considerations
e–
H2 O2
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+ +
+ +
+
+
+
+
Excess
H2
H2O
Anode Cathode
Electrolyte
4B Faraday’s laws
Calculations of quantities using
these laws and stoichiometry
???V
S
a
l
t
b
r
i
d
g
e
Zn 25°C
Ni
1 M Zn2+(aq) Zn(s) → Zn2+(aq) + 2e– 1 M Ni2+(aq)
Ni2+(aq) + 2e– → Ni(s)
See the Interactive Textbook for an interactive version of this concept map
interlinked with all concept maps for the course.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
4A FUEL CELLS
131
4A
Fuel cells
Study Design:
•
The common design features and general operating
principles of fuel cells, including the use of porous
electrodes for gaseous reactants to increase cell
efficiency (details of specific cells not required)
•
Contemporary responses to challenges and the
role of innovation in the design of fuel cells to meet
society’s energy needs, with reference to green
chemistry principles: design for energy efficiency
and use of renewable feedstocks
Glossary:
Biogas
Biomass
Catalytic electrode
Fuel cell
Gasification
Porous electrode
Renewable feedstock
ENGAGE
Fuel cell electric vehicles
Electric cars are becoming more and more common, such as those made by Tesla. Tesla
make battery-powered vehicles, in which the battery stores up energy (via charging) that
is then used to power the electric motor. Another type of electric car is also available: the
fuel cell electric vehicle (FCEV). In FCEVs, such as the Toyota Mirai and Hyundai Nexo,
hydrogen and oxygen combine in the fuel cell to generate electricity. Compared
to batteries, which take considerable time to charge, FCEVs can be refuelled in less than
four minutes. They can also travel further on average than battery-powered vehicles,
which is often one of the main reasons people are reluctant to switch to electric cars.
So why are FCEVs so much less popular? One of the biggest problems is that of
infrastructure. While hydrogen fuel cells have had plenty of success in powering non-
consumer engines, such as those of space shuttles and aircraft, their use in daily life is
limited by the need for vehicle refuelling stations to be common and easily accessible.
Currently, it is simply too costly and difficult to implement such infrastructure
compared to battery-charging stations. If hydrogen could be more readily available, and
sourced renewably, FCEVs could become much more common.
 Figure 4A–1 A hydrogen fuel cell sign on a car (left); a hydrogen refuelling station (right)
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
132 CHAPTER 4 FUEL CELLS
3C
FEATURES OF
GALVANIC CELLS
LINK
Fuel cell
a type of
electrochemical
cell that
produces
electrical energy
from chemical
energy, requiring
a continuous
supply of
reactants
7C
COMMERCIAL
ELECTROLYTIC
CELLS
LINK
VIDEO 4A–1
HOW DO FUEL
CELLS WORK?
EXPLAIN
Fuel cells
Fuel cells work in a similar way to other types of galvanic cells (which were discussed in
Section 3C), using spontaneous reactions to convert chemical energy into electrical energy.
Unlike primary galvanic cells, which eventually reach a state of equilibrium and no longer
produce electrical energy, fuel cells are a type of galvanic cell that do not store the reactants
in the cell. Instead, the reactants must be supplied from an external source. The huge
advantage of this is that the fuel cells are able to produce a continuous supply of electricity,
provided the supply of reactants into the cell is maintained. As well as this, they do not
require recharging like secondary cells do.
There are many different types of fuel cell, including the hydrogen-fuelled polymer
electrolyte membrane (also known as a proton exchange membrane or PEM) fuel cell,
methanol fuel cells, alkaline fuel cells (such as potassium hydroxide cells), phosphoric
acid fuel cells and solid oxide fuel cells. Regardless of the type of fuel cell, they share many
advantages, such as:
• They have higher efficiency than coal-fired power stations or combustion car engines.
This is because they directly convert chemical energy into electrical energy, rather
than relying on a number of energy transformation steps, which ultimately result in a
decrease in efficiency.
• They are relatively quiet when operating and the products of the reactions are generally
more environmentally friendly.
• Unlike other galvanic cells, the fuels used are not stored in the cell itself and so must
be generated and supplied from an external source. However, provided that there is a
constant supply of reactants, fuel cells are able to sustain long-term continuous energy
production (without needing to be recharged or replaced regularly).
• Catalysts and modifications to electrode design can be used to increase the rate
of reaction.
• Fuel cells are portable. Although they can’t necessarily be packaged into small battery-
sized compartments, their ability to produce electricity directly where it is needed makes
them suitable for use in vehicles, including space shuttles.
• There are a range of reactants that are suitable for use in fuel cells.
• They also generate heat, which can be used to minimise energy needs to fulfill heating
requirements.
Design features of fuel cells
Each fuel cell has similar design features, including:
• an anode and cathode, separated by an electrolyte
• inlets that allow for the continuous supply of fuel
• inlets that supply the other reactants for the reactions
• outlets for the products to leave the cell
• an external circuit where electrons flow as electrical energy is produced.
These features can be seen in Figure 4A–2 on the following page.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
4A FUEL CELLS
133
Flow of electrons
e−
Anode Cathode
Depleted fuel output
Depleted oxygen and
produced water
output
Oxygen input (02)
Fuel input
Gas diffusion layer
Gas diffusion layer
Proton exchange
membrane
 Figure 4A–2 A proton-exchange membrane fuel cell, highlighting features common to all fuel cells
DOC
WORKSHEET
4A–1
FEATURES OF
FUEL CELLS
Fuel cells often have design features that enhance the efficiency of the cells. Some of these
include:
• the use of catalytic electrodes to speed up the reactions taking place. One such example is
the use of powdered platinum anodes that help break fuel molecules into electrons and
ions. Another example is the use of a nickel cathode, which catalyses the conversion of
excess ions into water molecules.
• oxidation-resistant gas diffusion layers made from carbon-based materials. These
maintain an optimal flow rate of reactant gases and also ensure minimal water retention
within the cell, which can reduce the power being generated by the cell.
• porous electrodes to increase the effective surface area of the electrode, enhancing the
ability for gaseous reactants to diffuse through them easily and react with the ions
present in the electrolyte solution of the cell. This also distributes the current more
evenly within the electrode, improving the efficiency of the cell.
Sustainability and environmental considerations
With the current challenges of meeting society’s energy needs, there is more emphasis
than ever on researching and exploring innovative ways to design fuel cells in a way that
increases energy efficiency and minimises fuel consumption. Currently, fuel cells are used
mainly for space exploration, vehicle transportation and stationary power generation, the
latter of which can be configured to provide both heat and power. Using fuel cells in this
way improves energy efficiency as, in addition to the electrical energy that the cells produce,
the heat from the fuel cells can be used to generate hot water and low-pressure steam.
An absorption chiller can also be employed to use otherwise wasted energy to produce
chilled water.
Catalytic
electrode
an electrode
made from or
coated with a
substance that
acts to speed
up the rate of a
reaction in an
electrolytic cell
Porous electrode
an electrode
with tiny
spaces or holes
through which
substances, in
particular gases,
can diffuse
easily
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
134 CHAPTER 4 FUEL CELLS
One of the most discussed fuel cells to improve the environmental impact of energy
production is the hydrogen fuel cell. While there are many potential applications where
hydrogen fuel cells may prove to be useful, there is particular interest in how they could be
implemented in cars.
Figure 4A–3 Cars powered by hydrogen fuel cells may produce less than 50% of
the greenhouse gas emissions of vehicles currently running on petrol.
Hydrogen fuel cells have the same basic structure as other fuel cells but specifically have
hydrogen as the input. Importantly, the ‘waste’ products that are generated from these
fuel cells are heat and water (Figure 4A–4). As mentioned earlier, not only are these more
environmentally friendly than the outputs of traditional engines, but they can be useful to
help drive other processes.
e–
H2 O2
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+ +
+ +
+
+
+
Excess
H2
+
H2O
Cathode
Anode Electrolyte
Figure 4A–4 A hydrogen fuel cell is an environmentally
friendly approach to energy production that uses hydrogen
gas to produce electricity, while reducing carbon emissions.
According to a report by the United States Government Department of Energy, these fuel
cell-powered vehicles have the following benefits:
• They can generate energy with an efficiency of around 60%, whereas conventional petrol
engines are less than 20% efficient.
• Using natural gas as a source of hydrogen, these vehicles would have total greenhouse
gas emissions that are less than 50% of those produced by current vehicles.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
4A FUEL CELLS
135
As mentioned, as well as the improved efficiency, fuel cells use natural gas, or better still,
biogas or biomass, which can be re-formed into hydrogen. It is the hydrogen that then reacts
in the fuel cell to provide the electrical energy. Biogas can be generated from renewable
feedstocks, such as corn starch, switchgrass and soybean oil, as well as food scraps and
animal waste. However, classification of what is considered renewable can be debated.
There are huge advantages to the use of this material to produce energy. It is estimated that
every year in the United States alone, there could be up to one trillion kilograms of biomass
available for energy use. Biomass is converted to hydrogen gas, and other products, through
a process known as gasification.
LINK 1A TYPES OF
FUELS
Biogas
a type of biofuel
formed from the
breakdown of
organic waste
by anaerobic
bacteria
Biomass
renewable
organic matter
that comes from
plants, animals
and other living
organisms
Renewable
feedstock
raw material that
is used to supply
an industrial
process and
can be readily
replenished
Gasification
the process
through which
carbon-based
material is
converted into
gas products
that can be used
for fuel
Figure 4A–5 Biomass, such as corn, can be used to generate biogas that can power hydrogen
fuel cells.
The utilisation of organic and renewable feedstocks is one of the most important and
significant challenges that chemists face in the world today as society moves to eliminate
the use of non-renewable carbon resources such as coal, oil and natural gas. However,
our conceptions of what feedstocks should be considered renewable is still developing. In
December 2022, Australia became the first major economy to exclude native forest biomass
from being considered a renewable energy source. This is different from other regions,
such as the European Union (EU), which significantly relies on ‘woody biomass’ (the term
for trees and woody plants) to meet its renewable energy targets. Only time will tell if this
leads to any further global shift in the understanding of renewability, but regardless, there
will continue to be innovation and developments in the drive to produce fuel cells that are
designed to run more efficiently on affordable, scalable and sustainable fuels that have low
emissions to make them more environmentally friendly.
LINK
9C
SUSTAINABLE
PRODUCTION
OF ORGANIC
COMPOUNDS
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
136 CHAPTER 4 FUEL CELLS
4A SKILLS
1A TYPES
OF FUELS
LINK
Using tables for comparison
In Section 1A, the Skills section described important things to remember when writing
answers that require you to perform a comparison. To expand on these comments,
another useful technique when writing answers that involve a comparison is the use of a
table. Using a table is a really helpful method for ensuring that you illustrate your answer
clearly and cover all of the required points.
As an example, based on the material covered in this section, you could reasonably
expect to receive a question that asked the following:
Question: Compare the features and function of primary galvanic cells and fuel cells.
Answer: Instead of answering this as a paragraph of text, you may find it suits you better
to use a table. There are a couple of different ways that you could structure your tables.
Firstly, as shown below, you could have one column for galvanic cells and one column
for fuel cells. Each line in the table could then be used to describe a specific aspect, such
as the overall purpose, which has been filled in already. Any differences between the two
regarding that aspect would be highlighted by the text in each column.
Primary galvanic cells Fuel cells
Convert or make the header row singular
chemical energy into electrical energy
Convert chemical energy into electrical
energy
Secondly, as shown below, you could set up your table in a way that has a column for
similarities and a column for differences. This allows you to specifically highlight the
aspects in common and those that differ, but it doesn’t necessarily align them by an
overall theme.
Similarities Differences
Either method is effective, and it is important to work out what suits you personally. For
revision, you may wish to fill in the tables above with the information you have learned
so far.
Section 4A questions
1 State two similarities and two differences between primary galvanic cells and fuel cells.
2 State three advantages of using fuel cells.
3 Explain the importance of the following design features used in fuel cells:
a porous electrodes
b catalytic electrodes
4 Explain the importance of using renewable feedstocks to generate the reactants,
including hydrogen, used in fuel cells.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
4B FARADAy’s LAWS
137
4B
Faraday’s laws
Study Design:
•
The application of Faraday’s laws
and stoichiometry to determine the
quantity of galvanic or fuel cell reactant
and product, and the current or time
required to either use a particular
quantity of reactant or produce a
particular quantity of product
Glossary:
Ampere
Coulomb
Current
Electric charge
Faraday’s constant
ENGAGE
Who was Faraday?
Michael Faraday, born in 1791, was a scientist who made incredible discoveries in the
fields of chemistry and physics. He discovered several organic compounds, including
bicarburet of hydrogen (which we now call benzene), and many of his scientific
contributions laid the foundations for electromagnetic field theory. In this section,
we will look at two laws described by Faraday in 1833. These laws directly relate the
amount of reactant or product formed over time in an electrochemical cell with the
electric charge that runs through it. In commercial chemistry, where large amounts of
compounds need to be generated with a level of exactness, being able to apply these
laws is particularly significant. In this section, you will learn how to perform calculations
related to galvanic and fuel cells using Faraday’s laws.
Figure 4B–1 Illustration of Michael Faraday delivering a lecture in 1856
EXPLAIN
Faraday’s laws
It is important to be able to control or predict the outcomes in electrochemical cells. For
example, how much metal will be deposited at the cathode? How much reactant is needed
to produce a certain amount of electrical energy? How long will the cell operate for?
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
138 CHAPTER 4 FUEL CELLS
Electric charge
the amount of
energy electrons
carry; symbol Q
Coulomb
the unit used
to measure
the amount of
electric charge
something has
Faraday’s
constant
the amount of
charge that 1
mole of electrons
carries (F =
96 500 C mol–1)
To help understand how the number of electrons flowing through a circuit can be related
to the mass of the reactants consumed or products formed, we first need to understand
Faraday’s laws which state the following:
1 The mass of a substance (m) produced or consumed at an electrode is directly
proportional (∝) to the electric charge (Q) (m ∝ Q).
2 The amounts, in moles, of different substances produced or consumed at electrodes by
the passage of the same amount of electricity are inversely proportional to the charges
1
on their ions (n ∝
ionic charge).
3 Electric charge is measured in coulombs and is represented by the symbol, Q. The
amount of charge that 1 mole of electrons has is 96 500 coulombs (C). This amount is
known as Faraday’s constant, F, and can be written as:
F = 96 500 C mol–1
This relationship can be expressed through the equation:
Q = n(e–) × F
where:
Q = The electric charge (in coulombs)
n(e–) = The number of moles of electrons
F = Faraday’s constant (96 500 C mol–1)
Current and time
Current (I) is the rate that electric charge flows through a circuit during a certain period
of time and is measured in amperes or amps (A). One ampere is equal to one coulomb of
charge per second:
Current
the rate at which
electrons flow
within a circuit
Ampere
the unit used
for measuring
electric current;
also known
as amp
1 ampere (A) = 1 coulomb (C) per second (s)
1 A = 1 C s–1
The current flowing in an electrochemical cell will be directly proportional to the charge.
Put simply, the higher the current running through the cell, the more electrons passing
through the circuit, and the greater the amount of products formed. For example, if twice
the current is produced over a certain amount of time, then twice as many moles of the
products will be formed. Similarly, twice as much of the reactants will be consumed.
The time, t, for which a cell is operating is measured in seconds and is also directly
proportional to the charge. Put simply, the longer a cell operates, the more electrons pass
through the circuit and the greater the amount of products formed.
These factors are represented by the following relationship:
Q = I t
where:
Q = The electric charge (in coulombs)
I = The current (in amperes)
t = The time (in seconds).
NOTE
There is often a need to convert units from seconds to other units of time, and vice versa.
It is worth spending time familiarising yourself with the conversion steps needed for such
calculations.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
4B FARADAy’s LAWS
139
Calculations using Faraday’s laws and stoichiometry
For a galvanic or fuel cell, the chemical reactions that occur are spontaneous, so that once
the cell is connected electrical current will travel through the external circuit. An ammeter
can be used to measure the current over time and subsequently determine the total charge
that flows through the external circuit. Once this is known, the moles of electrons can
be calculated and using the half equations for the reactions taking place, it is possible to
determine how many moles of reactants have been consumed and/or how many moles of
product are formed.
Worked example 4B–1: Using Faraday’s laws and stoichiometry
VIDEO
WORKED
EXAMPLE 4B–1
A galvanic cell consists of two half-cells, one containing a nickel electrode and nickel
ions, Ni2+, the other with a silver electrode and silver ions, Ag+
.
a How much charge will flow through the cell if 3.50 g of nickel reacts?
Solution
Logic Process
Step 1 Identify the two half-equations occurring
in the cell using the electrochemical
series.
Reduction: Ag+(aq) + e–
→ Ag(s)
Oxidation: Ni(s) → Ni2+(aq) + 2e–
Step 2 Calculate the number of moles of nickel
using n =
m
M.
n(Ni) = m
M
n(Ni) = 3.5 g
58.7 g mol–1
n(Ni) = 0.0596 mol
Step 3 Determine the mole ratio of electrons to
solid nickel.
n(e–) : n(Ni) = 2 : 1
Step 4 Calculate the number of moles of
electrons using the mole ratio.
n(e–) = n(Ni) × 2
n(e–) = 0.0596 × 2
n(e–) = 0.119 mol
Step 5 Calculate the amount of charge using
Faraday’s constant.
Q = n(e–) × F
Q = 0.119 mol × 96 500
Q = 11 500 C
b If a constant current of 4.2 amps is applied, how long would it take for 3.5 g of nickel
to react (to the nearest minute)?
Solution
Logic Process
Step 1 Identify the key pieces of information in
the question.
I = 4.2 amps
Q = 11 500 C (from part a)
Step 2 Rearrange Q = It to solve for t. Q = It
Q
t =
I
11500
t =
4.2
t = 2738 seconds
Step 3 Convert the answer into minutes. t =
2738
60
t = 46 minutes
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
140 CHAPTER 4 FUEL CELLS
Charge of the ion
Consider a galvanic cell with one half-cell containing Na+ ions that will be reduced at the
cathode to sodium metal, as follows:
Na+(aq) + e–
→ Na(s)
For every 1 mole of electrons flowing though the cell, 1 mole of sodium metal is produced.
However, now consider a different galvanic cell with the half-cell containing Mg2+ ions
reacting at the cathode as follows:
Mg2+(aq) + 2e–
→ Mg(s)
In this reaction, to produce 1 mole of magnesium metal, there are 2 moles of electrons
required, twice as many as were needed for sodium.
Lastly, imagine a galvanic cell with a half-cell containing Al3+ ions reacting at the cathode as
follows:
Al3+(aq) + 3e–
→ Al(s)
In this reaction, to produce 1 mole of aluminium metal, there are 3 moles of electrons
required, three times as many as were needed for sodium.
As mentioned earlier, this relationship can be represented by the following equation:
Q = n(e–) × F
Simply put, the larger the charge on the ion, the smaller the amount of that species will
react or be produced during the reaction.
WORKSHEET
4B–1
CALCULATIONS
USING
FARADAY'S LAWS
NOTE
DOC
The amount of a substance that reacts or is produced at an electrode is proportional to both the
current and time but is inversely proportional to the charge of the ion.
Check-in questions − Set 1
1 State whether making the following changes would result in an increase or a decrease of
the amount of reactants used in galvanic cells and fuel cells.
a increasing the length of time that a cell is operating for
b increasing the ionic charge on the ion species being reduced at the cathode
2 When using the formulas for Faraday calculations, state the units needed for each
variable below.
a current
b time
c electric charge
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
Worked example 4B–2: Calculating the current in a cell
4B FARADAy’s LAWS
141
VIDEO
WORKED
EXAMPLE 4B–2
A galvanic cell is set up as shown below. After 15.00 minutes, there is an increase in
mass at the cathode of 0.95 grams. Calculate the current running through the cell,
assuming that it remains constant.
???v
S
a
l
t
b
r
i
d
g
e
Zn 25°C
Ni
1 M Zn2+(aq) Zn(s) → Zn2+(aq) + 2e– Figure 4B–2 A zinc–nickel cell
1 M Ni2+(aq)
Ni2+(aq) + 2e– → Ni(s)
Solution
Logic Process
Step 1 Identify the reduction half-equation (as 0.95
grams are being deposited, not reacted), using
the electrochemical series.
Ni2+(aq) + 2e–
→ Ni(s)
Step 2 Calculate the moles of nickel using n =
m
M n(Ni) = m
M
n(Ni) = 0.95 g
58.7 g mol–1
n(Ni) = 0.016 mol
Step 3 Determine the mole ratio of electrons to
solid nickel.
n(e–) : n(Ni) = 2 : 1
Step 4 Calculate the moles of electrons using the
mole ratio.
n(e–) = n(Ni) × 2
n(e–) = 0.016 × 2
n(e–) = 0.032 mol
Step 5 Calculate the charge using Faraday’s constant. Q = n(e–) × F
Q = 0.032 mol × 96 500
Q = 3124 C
Step 6 Rearrange Q = It to solve for I. Q = It
Q
I =
t
3124
I =
(15 × 60)
I = 3.5 amps
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
142 CHAPTER 4 FUEL CELLS
4B SKILLS
Units and unit conversion
In this section, you have seen that in calculations you may be dealing with many
different units: coulombs, amperes, grams, seconds, minutes, moles etc. It is important
that you are confident with the unit that is associated with every aspect of your
calculations, as you should make it a habit to include them in all your working-out steps
and, even more importantly, in your final answer. An answer without units provided,
assuming they are required, is meaningless and may not receive any marks.
In a similar fashion, it is also important to pay close attention to the units that are
required for the answer. A common example of this is found when using the Q = I t
equation, where the question may require you to provide an answer for the time in
minutes. As you may remember, the expression involves time in seconds. Therefore, in
questions such as this, you will need to divide the answer that you get by 60 to end up
with an answer in the appropriate units.
Section 4B questions
1 Nickel ions undergo reduction to solid nickel at the cathode of a particular galvanic cell.
Determine how long it will take to deposit 2.00 grams of nickel in a galvanic cell if a
current of 1.85 amps is applied to the cell, to the nearest minute.
2 Solid copper undergoes oxidation to copper(II) ions at the anode in a galvanic cell.
Determine the mass of copper lost if 1.2 amps of current is running through the cell for
12.0 minutes.
3 Determine the amount of current running through a fuel cell if 11.65 grams of silver at
the cathode are deposited after 2.50 hours. The reaction occurring at the cathode is:
Ag+(aq) + e–
→ Ag(s)
4 Hearing aids are often powered by alkaline batteries that last for 1200 hours. The half-
reactions occurring in an alkaline battery are:
Zn(s) + 2OH−(aq) → ZnO(s) + H2O(l) + 2e−
2MnO2(s) + H2O(l) + 2e−
→ Mn2O3(s) + 2OH−(aq)
If a hearing aid uses 1 mA of current, calculate the mass of zinc reacting during its
lifetime. Assume the current remains constant.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
143
Chapter 4 review
Summary
Create your own set of summary notes for this chapter, on paper or in a digital document. A model
summary is provided in the Teacher Resources and can be used to compare with yours.
Checklist
In the Interactive Textbook, the success criteria are linked from the review questions and will be
automatically ticked when answers are correct. Alternatively, print or photocopy this page and tick
the boxes when you have answered the corresponding questions correctly.
Success criteria – I am now able to: Linked questions
4A.1 4A.2 4A.3 4A.4 4B.1 4B.2 4B.3  Compare the similarities and differences between galvanic cells and
fuel cells
Identify and describe the common design features of fuel cells  Explain the importance of key design features in terms of reaction
efficiency
 Describe green chemistry principles that enhance the sustainability
of fuel cells, including the use of renewable feedstocks
 Determine the stoichiometric relationship between the quantity of
reactant or product and electrons represented by half-equations in
the electrochemical series
 Calculate the amount of current or time required for a galvanic
or fuel cell to produce a given amount of electric charge using
Faraday’s laws equations
 Calculate the amount of reactant used or product formed during
reactions occurring in a galvanic or fuel cell using Faraday’s laws
equations
2☐, 11☐
6☐, 11☐, 14☐
4☐, 11☐
5☐, 8☐, 11☐
10☐
1☐, 3☐, 12☐,
13 ☐
1☐, 7☐, 9☐,
10☐, 12☐, 13 ☐
Multiple-choice questions
1 What is the unit of electric charge used in Faraday’s laws?
A ohm
B volt
C ampere
D coulomb
2 Which of the following best describes a fuel cell?
A a device that stores electrical energy in chemical form
B a device that generates mechanical energy from heat energy
C a device that converts chemical energy into electrical energy
D a device that converts electrical energy into chemical energy
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
144
3 If a constant current of 2.6 amperes is applied, how long (in minutes) will it take to produce
9516 coulombs of electric charge?
A 6
B 61
C 410
D 3660
4 Which of the following statements is true regarding the advantages of fuel cells?
A Fuel cells require frequent recharging.
B Fuel cells have limited application areas.
C Fuel cells offer high energy-conversion efficiency.
D Fuel cells have high levels of carbon emissions.
5 Gasification is the process by which
A fuel cells release their waste products.
B biomass is converted to hydrogen gas.
C liquid hydrogen is converted to hydrogen gas.
D hydrogen gas is converted to electrical energy.
6 Which of the following combinations regarding fuel cell features and their roles is incorrect?
Feature Role
A Anode Site of oxidation
B External circuit Allows movement of electrons from the anode to the cathode
C Catalyst Increases the rate of the chemical reaction
D Electrolyte Allows movement of electrons from the cathode to the anode
7 Which of the following statements best represents Faraday’s first law?
A The electric charge is directly proportional to the mass of substance consumed.
B The electric charge is inversely proportional to the mass of substance consumed.
C The electric charge is measured in amperes and is dependent on the length of time the
cell is operating.
D The electric charge is measured in coulombs and is independent of the length of time
the cell is operating.
8 Biogas can be re-formed into hydrogen to be used as a fuel in a fuel cell. Biogas can come from
renewable feedstocks, which are thought to be more sustainable. A key advantage of renewable
feedstocks is that they are
A expensive.
B energy rich.
C easily replenished.
D environmentally unfriendly.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
145
9 Faraday’s constant is the electric charge equivalent to
A 1 mole of electrons.
B 1 coulomb per second.
C 96 500 Faraday.
D 96 500 amperes.
10 How much charge would flow through a galvanic cell if 16.35 g of zinc reacts at the anode?
A 12 063 C
B 24 125 C
C 48 250 C
D 96 500 C
Short-answer questions
11 State whether the following statements are true or false. Justify your response.
a Fuel cells convert electrical energy into chemical energy. b Porous electrodes are used in fuel cells to allow gases to diffuse more easily. c Fuel cells can be recharged by connecting them to a power source. d Electrons travel from the anode to the cathode in fuel cells. e Fuel cells generate a lot of pollutants. f Renewable feedstocks can be used to source reactants used in fuel cells that are sustainable
and minimise environmental impacts. (1 mark)
(1 mark)
(1 mark)
(1 mark)
(1 mark)
(1 mark)
12 A galvanic cell consists of two half-cells, one containing a zinc electrode and zinc ions, Zn2+
,
the other with a silver electrode and silver ions, Ag+
.
a How much charge will flow through the cell if 3.50 grams of zinc react? b If a constant current of 2.50 amps is applied, how long, to the nearest minute, would it take
for 3.50 grams of zinc to react? c When the cell is connected and allowed to react for five minutes, 1.95 grams of silver is
deposited at the cathode. Assuming it is constant the entire time, calculate the amount of
current running through the cell. d If the cell is left running for two hours, with a constant current of 0.30 amps, what is the
expected decrease in mass of the anode? (2 marks)
(2 marks)
(2 marks)
(2 marks)
13 Consider the galvanic cell shown on the right.
a Calculate the length of time (in minutes)
required to produce 0.40 grams at the
cathode if this cell has a constant current
of 3.0 amps. (2 marks)
b Calculate the mass lost at the anode if this
cell runs with a constant current of 6.0
amps for three minutes. (2 marks)
???A
S
a
l
t
b
r
i
d
g
e
Zn 25°C
Ni
1 M Zn2+(aq) Zn(s) → Zn2+(aq) + 2e– 1 M Ni2+(aq)
Ni2+(aq) + 2e– → Ni(s)
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
146
14 An alternative to hydrogen–oxygen fuel cells is the aluminium–oxygen battery, depicted in the
image below.
Load
Oxygen (g)
Aluminium (s)
Hydroxide ions (aq)
The overall equation for the reaction in the aluminium–oxygen battery is:
4Al(s) + 3O2(g) + 6H2O(l) → 4Al(OH)3(s)
a Use oxidation numbers to demonstrate that a redox reaction has occurred. b Which species undergoes oxidation?  c What is the oxidising agent? d Write the half-equation for the oxidation reaction. e Write the half-equation for the reduction reaction. f The electrode in contact with oxygen is the focus of a lot of testing and trials.
It is important that this electrode is both porous and coated with a catalyst.
State why each of these features is crucial to the operation of the cell.  i porous
ii catalytic
(2 marks)
(1 mark)
(1 mark)
(1 mark)
(1 mark)
(2 marks)
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
147
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
148
UNIT
3
HOW CAN DESIGN AND INNOVATION HELP TO
OPTIMISE CHEMICAL PROCESSES?
CHAPTER
5
RATES OF REACTION
INTRODUCTION
VIDEO
RATES OF
REACTION
Introduction
You probably know that reactions are occurring all around us. This chapter
will examine the nature of these reactions, what conditions need to be met for
a reaction to occur and what can be altered to increase the rate of reactions.
You will learn about reaction rate and the factors that can speed up a reaction. By
extension, you will also be able to infer the factors that slow down a reaction. You
will also learn about catalysts and how they provide an alternative reaction pathway.
Curriculum
Area of Study 2 Outcome 2
How can the rate and yield of chemical reactions be optimised?
Study Design: Learning intentions – at the end of the chapter I will be able to:
•
Factors affecting the
frequency and success of
reactant particle collisions
and the rate of a chemical
reaction in open and
closed systems, including
temperature, surface
area, concentration, gas
pressures, presence of a
catalyst, activation energy
and orientation
5A 5A.1 5A.2 5A.3 5A.4 What causes a chemical reaction?
Differentiate between open and closed systems
 Outline how reactions proceed differently in open and
closed systems
Describe the factors that comprise collision theory
 Describe how the rate of a reaction can be monitored
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
149
Study Design: Learning intentions – at the end of the chapter I will be able to:
•
Factors affecting the
frequency and success of
reactant particle collisions
and the rate of a chemical
reaction in open and
closed systems, including
temperature, surface
area, concentration, gas
pressures, presence of a
catalyst, activation energy
and orientation
5B Factors affecting reaction rate
5B.1  Explain the relationship between concentration and rate
of reaction
5B.2  Explain the relationship between gas pressure and rate
of reaction
5B.3  Explain the relationship between surface area and rate
of reaction
5B.4  Explain the relationship between temperature and rate
of reaction
5B.5  Outline the effect of temperature on the rate of reaction
using a Maxwell–Boltzmann distribution curve
5B.6 5B.7 5B.8 •
The role of catalysts in
increasing the rate of
specific reactions with
reference to alternative
reaction pathways of
lower activation energies,
and represented using
energy profile diagrams
VCE Chemistry Study Design extracts © VCAA; reproduced by permission.
Glossary
Catalyst
Closed system
Collision theory
Heterogeneous
Homogeneous
Kinetic energy
Open system
Surface area
 Explain the relationship between the presence of a
catalyst and rate of reaction
 Outline the effect of a catalyst on the rate of reaction
using an energy profile diagram
 Outline the effect of a catalyst on the rate of reaction
using a Maxwell–Boltzmann distribution curve
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
150 CONCEPT MAP
Concept map
5A What causes a
chemical reaction?
Exploring collision theory to
understand what needs to happen
for a successful reaction to occur
Correct orientation
Y
X
X
+
Y
Y
Reactants
Successful collision
X
X
Y
Y
X
Reaction occurs,
products formed
X
Y
Incorrect orientation
X X Y+ Y
+ Y
Y
X X
Y Y
X X
Reactants Unsuccessful
collision
Reaction unsuccessful,
reactants remain
5B Factors affecting reaction rate
Exploring how factors,
such as temperature and
concentration, affect the rate of
chemical reactions
See the Interactive Textbook for an interactive version of this concept map
interlinked with all concept maps for the course.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
5A WHAT CAuSES a CHEMICAL REACTION?
151
What causes a chemical reaction?
5A
Study Design:
Factors affecting the frequency and success
of reactant particle collisions and the rate
of a chemical reaction in open and closed
systems, including temperature, surface area,
concentration, gas pressures, presence of a
catalyst, activation energy and orientation
Glossary:
Closed system
Collision theory
Kinetic energy
Open system
ENGAGE
Laptops and limestone
The rate of a reaction is the speed that it goes from the starting reactants to the final
products. Some reactions are very fast, on the scale of milliseconds or less, while others
are so slow that it appears like nothing is happening. Consider a battery in your laptop –
each second, the chemicals inside it are reacting millions of times to produce electrons
and, in turn, electricity. The reactions are so fast that they cannot be seen, they can only
be measured. Stalactites, however, are a great example of reactions that occur slowly.
These structures in caves are a product of calcium reacting with carbon dioxide, but
they take years to form. In fact, they can grow as little as 0.1 mm per year! Regardless of
whether reactions are fast or slow, they all need to satisfy a number of conditions. In this
section, we are going to discuss what has to happen for a reaction to occur and how the
speed of a reaction can be monitored.
Figure 5A–1 The reactions that lead to the formation of stalactites take centuries (left), whereas
the ones that produce electricity in a laptop battery are incredibly fast (right).
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
152 CHAPTER 5 RATES OF REACTION
EXPLAIN
Rates of reactions
Chemical reactions are occurring in our body and in nature all the time. Some of them are
slow, others are fast. Similarly, reactions are also a major part of many of the industrial
processes that help to produce important everyday products such as the following:
• Ammonia is formed from the reaction of hydrogen and nitrogen and is an important
compound in the production of fertilisers commonly used in the farming industry.
• Sulfuric acid is produced from the reaction of sulfur, oxygen and water, and is also
critical in the generation of fertilisers.
• Ethanol is produced from the fermentation of glucose, which is important in the
production of wine and other alcoholic drinks.
When a reaction is occurring at an industrial level, it is particularly important that the
rate of a reaction is fast enough that it allows products to be formed in a way that is cost
effective, but not so fast that an explosion occurs. To achieve this balance and be able to
control the reactions that are taking place, it is important to have a good understanding of
the factors that determine the rate of a reaction. Reaction rate is very similar to speed and,
like speed, the units of reaction rate are relative to time. Two ways that we can measure
the rate of a reaction is by monitoring the decrease in the concentration of a reactant or
the increase in the concentration of a product. We can visualise this graphically, as seen in
Figure 5A–2. It is important to note that concentration is not always the easiest aspect of
a reaction to measure, so other quantities can be measured. If a gas is produced as part of
the reaction, the volume of this can be monitored over time to provide information about
the rate of the reaction. Similarly, if a gas is produced and the reaction is taking place in an
open system, the decrease in mass over time (as the gas moves to the surroundings) can be
measured to calculate the reaction rate. Essentially, any aspect of a reaction that changes
over time as a result of the reaction, and is measurable, can be used to calculate the rate of
reaction.
A
B
Concentration (M)
Concentration (M)
Time (s)
Time (s)
Figure 5A–2 Reaction rate can be measured by monitoring the decrease in concentration over time of a
reactant (A) or increase in concentration over time of a product (B). In both instances, reaction rates can be
relatively fast (red) or relatively slow (green).
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
5A WHAT CAuSES a CHEMICAL REACTION?
153
LINK
1C
EXOTHERMIC AND
ENDOTHERMIC
REACTIONS
∆c
In the example shown in Figure 5A–2, the change in concentration of the reactants or
products per unit of time is the way we measure the rate. As a reminder from Section 1C,
a ‘change’ is shown by the ∆ symbol, such that a change in concentration is shown as ∆c.
This is shown mathematically below:
Rate = change in concentration
=
change in time
∆t
It is important to note that while this equation represents the example shown in
Figure 5A–2, you will likely come across other examples that require you to calculate
change in mass or change in volume over time.
Open versus closed systems
When molecules react, we often think of them as two molecules existing in the absence of
everything else and sitting right beside each other in space. This simple thought experiment
helps us understand the atomic nature of molecules, but it is far from the reality of how
reactions occur in real life.
Whether molecules come into contact to facilitate a reaction depends on the nature of the
system they are in. Some molecules are in a system where they cannot escape; we call these
closed systems (as represented in Figure 5A–3). A good example of this is a flask with a lid
tightly screwed on. Some molecules are in a system where they can leave the area of the
reaction; we call these open systems. A good example of an open system is the lungs, where
molecules can be exhaled with an extremely high chance of never returning.
Open system Closed system
Matter
Closed system
an environment
where energy
can be
transferred
between the
reaction and the
surroundings,
but matter
cannot
Open system
an environment
where both
energy and
matter can be
transferred
between the
reaction and the
surroundings
Heat Heat
Allows exchange of both energy
(typically through heat) and matter
Allows exchange of energy
(typically through heat), but not matter
Figure 5A–3 Open systems (left) allow the transfer of energy and matter between the reaction and
surroundings, whereas closed systems (right) hold the reactants and products within the system.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
154 CHAPTER 5 RATES OF REACTION
Check-in questions – Set 1
1 In each of the following circumstances, describe how you would expect a
concentration–time graph to change if the rate of reaction was increased.
a Octane is undergoing combustion in a closed system and the rate of reaction is being
monitored through measuring the volume of carbon dioxide produced.
b Aspirin is reacting with water to form salicylic acid and acetic acid, and the rate of
reaction is being monitored through measuring the concentration of aspirin.
2 For many reactions, it is important to know how fast or slow they are going.
a What are two components of a reaction that can be monitored to measure the rate of
a reaction?
b Draw graphs to represent what you would expect to see for each answer given in
part a, showing both a slow and a fast reaction for each.
c Is it easier to monitor the rate of a reaction if it is in a closed or open system? Explain.
VIDEO 5A–1
UNDERSTANDING
COLLISION THEORY
Collision theory
the principle
that allows for
the prediction
of the success
and rate of
a chemical
reaction
Kinetic energy
the energy an
object or particle
has due to its
motion
1C EXOTHERMIC
AND
ENDOTHERMIC
REACTIONS
LINK
Collision theory
Up until this point, we have discussed the fact that chemical reactions occur all the time
around us and you may have the impression that this means that they happen easily. There
is in fact a series of conditions that must be met for a reaction to take place, which is known
as collision theory.
Three main points comprise collision theory.
1 Particles must collide.
As an example, the reaction to produce water involves oxygen reacting with hydrogen.
The reaction can only occur if the hydrogen molecules collide with the oxygen molecules.
However, this alone is not enough to ensure the reaction takes place.
2 Particles must collide with sufficient energy to react.
When reactions occur, the reactant molecules need to have enough energy to form the
products of the reaction. Energy can come from a range of sources, but one of the most
common forms is movement. This type of energy is called kinetic energy. Kinetic energy
is one of the types of energy a molecule brings to a reaction when it collides with another
molecule. A reaction can only be successful if the molecules reacting have sufficient kinetic
energy to overcome the minimum energy requirements of the reaction (Figure 5A–4). The
minimum energy is called activation energy, which you learned about in Section 1C.
Ea
Energy
Reactants
Energy
Ea Products
Reactants
Products
Progress of reaction Progress of reaction
Figure 5A–4 For a reaction to occur, the reactant molecules must collide with sufficient energy; that
is, energy greater than the activation energy. The activation energy (Ea) can be shown on an energy
profile diagram, as shown by the green arrow.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
5A WHAT CAuSES a CHEMICAL REACTION?
155
3 Particles must collide in the correct orientation.
In the previous point, we considered successful reactions in terms of energy alone; however,
when a collision occurs, it can be unsuccessful even if it has enough energy. This is because
when molecules collide, they need to align in the right configuration to help form the
products of the reaction. If not, the reaction will not proceed, and the molecules will simply
bounce off one another. A good way to think of this is the ‘lock-and-key’ model. For a door
to be successfully opened, not only do we need enough energy to insert the key in the lock,
but we also need to have the key in the right alignment to fit into the keyhole. The concept
of the lock-and-key model will be discussed in more detail when enzymes are introduced in
Section 12B. This helps explain why some reactions may have low activation energies but
still have a low percentage of reactants successfully forming products. Gases, for example,
with such freedom to move, often collide in misaligned geometries, resulting in the
molecules simply bouncing off one another (Figure 5A–5).
Correct orientation
Y
Successful collision
X
X
Y
X
Y
+
X
Y
X
Y
Reaction occurs,
products formed
X
Reactants
Y
Incorrect orientation
X X Y+ Y
+ Y
Y
X X
Y Y
X X
Reactants Unsuccessful
collision
Reaction unsuccessful,
reactants remain
Figure 5A–5 Correct orientation (top diagram) allows the formation of products, whereas incorrect
orientation (bottom diagram) leads to an unsuccessful reaction and the reactants bouncing off
one another.
For a collision to be successful, two key factors are needed: correct orientation and
sufficient energy to reach the activation energy of the reaction. This means that for any
collision there are four possible scenarios (Table 5A–1).
Table 5A–1 Four possible outcomes of particle collisions
LINK 12B
ENZYMES
DOC
X Y
Incorrect orientation,
insufficient energy = no reaction
WORKSHEET
5A–1
UNDERSTANDING
COLLISION
THEORY
X Y
Incorrect orientation,
sufficient energy = no reaction
X Y
Correct orientation,
insufficient energy = no reaction
X
Y
Correct orientation,
sufficient energy = reaction
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
156 CHAPTER 5 RATES OF REACTION
VIDEO 5A–2
SKILLS:
USING GRAPHS IN
ANSWERS
5A SKILLS
Using graphs in answers
In some questions, you may be asked directly to draw a graph to form part of your
answer. In other questions, while not specifically asked, you may find that using a graph
as part of your response is a helpful way of illustrating your answer. In either case, there
are a number of things that you have to remember to include with your diagram to
ensure that you receive full marks.
Consider the following question and the answer provided for it.
Question:
Sodium ions can react with phosphate ions in solution to form sodium phosphate.
Depending on the conditions, the rate of this reaction can be relatively fast or slow.
Draw a graph showing the change in sodium ion concentration in solution over time
for a fast and slow reaction.
Answer:
As an answer, the student has correctly identified that, as the question has asked for the
change in concentration of a reactant, the curve should show a decrease over time. They
have also provided two different curves, which do indicate different rates of reaction.
However, there are a number of issues that would prevent this from gaining full marks,
such as:
• The axes aren’t labelled. These need information to show what is being represented
on the graph. These should also be as specific as possible (e.g. the y-axis should show
‘Concentration of Na+’, not just ‘Concentration’. It is also important to include units,
if applicable.
• The two curves aren’t distinguished at all to indicate which is the fast reaction and
which is the slow reaction. At a minimum, the curves need to be labelled in a way that
highlights what curve represents what part of the answer. Ideally, you could also look
to draw each one in a different colour to further differentiate the two.
Putting all of this together, a much better answer to this question would look like the
following diagram.
Answer:
Concentration
of Na+ (mol L–1)
Slow reaction
Fast reaction
Time (s)
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
5A WHAT CAuSES a CHEMICAL REACTION?
157
Section 5A questions
1 A scientist is observing a chemical reaction at a molecular level. They see a hydrogen
molecule (H2) and an oxygen molecule (O2) collide, but no water is produced.
What are two reasons why a chemical reaction may not have eventuated from this
collision?
2 Activation energy plays an important part in chemical reactions.
a Draw an energy profile diagram for an exothermic reaction and clearly label the
activation energy for the reaction.
b How does the activation energy relate to collision theory?
3 A piece of solid magnesium metal is placed into a conical flask containing aqueous
hydrochloric acid. A stopper is placed into the top of the flask after the reaction begins.
The reaction produces aqueous magnesium chloride and hydrogen gas.
a Write a balanced chemical equation for the reaction occurring in the flask.
b Does the presence of a stopper suggest that this reaction is occurring in an open
or closed system? Explain your choice by describing the parameters for the system
you chose.
c The reaction between magnesium and hydrochloric acid is exothermic. Based on
your answer to part b, describe what would happen to the heat generated as part of
this reaction.
d Describe two approaches that you could take to monitor the rate of the reaction.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
158 CHAPTER 5 RATES OF REACTION
5B
Factors affecting reaction rate
•
•
Factors affecting the frequency and success of reactant
particle collisions and the rate of a chemical reaction
in open and closed systems, including temperature,
surface area, concentration, gas pressures, presence of
a catalyst, activation energy and orientation
The role of catalysts in increasing the rate of specific
reactions with reference to alternative reaction
pathways of lower activation energies, and represented
using energy profile diagrams
Glossary:
Catalyst
Heterogeneous
Homogeneous
Surface area
ENGAGE
The chemistry of cooking
We control the rate of chemical reactions every day without even realising that we
are doing it. Consider cooking yourself a steak for dinner – what happens if you cook
the steak on a low heat compared to if you put it in a very hot frypan? You’ll probably
realise that the steak is going to cook much, much quicker when you have the stove
up really high! While the
same reaction is taking
place in both situations,
it is just happening at a
much faster rate when the
temperature of the frypan is
higher. Understanding how
different conditions and
factors can impact on the
rate of reaction is important,
especially for those used in
commercial and industrial
settings. In this section, we
are going to explore how
concentration, gas pressure,
temperature, surface area
and catalysts impact on the
rates of reactions.
EXPLAIN
Effects on reaction rates
In this section, we are going to be focusing on factors that affect the rate of reaction. For
each one, it is important that you can do the following:
• State the relationship between the condition and the rate of reaction.
• Explain this relationship by referring to the relevant points in collision theory.
As we move through this section, we will discuss each factor individually and use this
format to discuss their effect on the rate of reaction.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
5B FACTORS AFFECTING REACTION RATE
159
Concentration and rate of reaction
Relationship: An increased concentration leads to an increased rate of reaction.
Explanation: If we think back to Unit 2, concentration is a measurement of how many
particles are in a given space or volume. This can be demonstrated in Figure 5B–1, which
shows the concentration of a solution increasing from low to high.
1 L
1 L 1 L
LINK UNIT 2
Low concentration High concentration
Figure 5B–1 In a high concentration solution, there are more
particles in a given volume, so the probability of them colliding is
higher than when the concentration is low.
So why does an increased concentration lead to an increased rate of reaction? To answer
this, we must refer to collision theory. A summary of this is provided in Table 5B–1.
Table 5B–1 The effect of an increased concentration on the different aspects of collision theory
LINK
5A WHAT CAUSES
A CHEMICAL
REACTION?
Collision theory Effect of increased concentration
Particles must collide Increased collision frequency
Particles must collide with sufficient energy No effect
Particles must collide in the correct orientation No effect
As Table 5B–1 illustrates, the main reason that an increased concentration leads to an
increased rate of reaction is that there is an increased collision frequency. Put simply, when
there are more particles in a given space, the probability of them colliding is much higher
(Figure 5B–1).
If you think about this in a real-world scenario, imagine walking around your chemistry
classroom when there are only five other people in the room. The likelihood that you will
bump into one of them is low. However, if there were 50 people in the classroom, the chances
of people running into each other while randomly moving around is much, much higher. We
can think of particles colliding in low and high concentration solutions in the same way.
While an increased concentration doesn’t affect the energy of the particles, nor the
orientation that they collide in, the fact that there are more collisions (that is, a higher
collision frequency) means that there are more chances for a successful reaction to occur.
Gas pressure and rate of reaction
Relationship: An increase in gas pressure leads to an increased rate of reaction.
Explanation: To understand the effect of gas pressure on the rate of reaction, we must
understand the relationship between gas pressure and volume (generally this refers to
the volume of the reaction vessel). As the volume decreases, the gas pressure increases.
Conversely, as the volume increases, the gas pressure decreases. This is shown in
Figure 5B–2, which shows two different-sized reaction vessels: they both contain the
same number of particles but have different gas pressures.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
160 CHAPTER 5 RATES OF REACTION
Low pressure High pressure
Figure 5B–2 The same amount of gas particles in a container with a greater volume (left) will have a
lower gas pressure than if they were in a container with a smaller volume (right).
So why does an increased gas pressure lead to an increased rate of reaction? To answer this,
we must refer to collision theory. A summary of this is provided in Table 5B–2.
Table 5B–2 The effect of increased gas pressure on the different aspects of collision theory
Collision theory Effect of increased gas pressure
Particles must collide Increased collision frequency
Particles must collide with sufficient energy No effect
Particles must collide in the correct orientation No effect
In closed systems, reactions are affected by the space they have available to operate in.
According to collision theory, the more space available for molecules to occupy, the less
likely they will collide (in correct alignment). If you had the same number of gas particles,
one in a 1 L container (low pressure) and one in a 100 mL container (high pressure), we
would expect more collisions when the pressure is higher (that is, in the 100 mL container).
Low pressure High pressure
Figure 5B–3 Large volumes (left) have low pressures and the number of particle collisions is low;
thus, the reaction rate is low. Small volumes (right) have high pressures and the number of particle
collisions is high, thus the reaction rate is high.
As you can see, this is very similar to what was discussed for concentration. In this instance,
instead of increasing the collision frequency by increasing the number of particles present
in the space, we are decreasing the space that the particles are present in. To refer to our
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
5B FACTORS AFFECTING REACTION RATE
161
classroom analogy, this would be the equivalent of moving the five students from their
chemistry classroom into a storage closet. As you can imagine, they are much more likely to
bump into each other if they try and move around in that cramped space than they were in
the large classroom.
Similar to concentration, an increased gas pressure does not affect the energy of the
particles, nor the orientation that they collide in. However, once again, the fact that there
are more collisions (that is, a higher collision frequency) means that there are more chances
for a successful reaction to occur.
Check-in questions – Set 1
1 A chemical reaction between gases is occurring in a 250 mL container. The scientist
wants to speed up the reaction and so decreases the volume of the container to 100 mL.
a What will this change do to the pressure inside the container?
b Will this change successfully increase the rate of the reaction? Explain why or why not.
2 State whether the following statements are true or false.
a Decreasing the concentration of a solution leads to an increased collision frequency.
b Increasing the concentration of a solution leads to an increase in the kinetic energy of
the particles.
c Increasing the concentration of a solution increases the rate of reaction by decreasing
the activation energy.
d Decreasing the concentration leads to a decreased rate of reaction.
Surface area and rate of reaction
Relationship: An increase in surface area leads to an increased rate of reaction. (Note:
Sometimes you will see this described in terms of particle size. In this instance, the
relationship is: An increase in particle size leads to a decreased rate of reaction.)
Explanation: When we talk about an increased surface area, it may be helpful to picture
some examples. In Figure 5B–4, we can see an image of a solid piece of sodium metal (left)
and sodium powder reacting (right). The solid sodium has a much lower surface area than
the sodium powder, which is why the rate of reaction for the powder is so much greater
(and explosive!).
Surface area
a measure of the
area of a solid
that is exposed
and able to react
Figure 5B–4 Solid sodium (left) is safe to have in the open as the surface area that can react with
the atmosphere is a small proportion of the volume of the object, and thus the reaction rate is low.
Powdered sodium (right), however, is made of many small particles, all of which can react with the
atmosphere. Therefore, the reaction rate is fast (and the reaction is violent!).
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
162 CHAPTER 5 RATES OF REACTION
So why does an increased surface area lead to an increased rate of reaction? To answer this,
we must refer to collision theory again. A summary of this is provided in Table 5B–3.
Table 5B–3 The effect of an increased surface area on the different aspects of collision theory
Collision theory Effect of increased surface area
Particles must collide Increased collision frequency
Particles must collide with sufficient energy No effect
Particles must collide in the correct orientation No effect
To understand exactly why an increased surface area leads to an increased collision
frequency, it can be helpful to visualise it (Figure 5B–5).
Figure 5B–5 Increasing the surface area of a reactant allows for an increased collision frequency.
When there is a small surface area (left), there are fewer particles available to react (shown in
orange) than when there is a larger surface area (right).
VIDEO 5B–1
HOW DOES
TEMPERATURE
AFFECT THE
RATE OF A
REACTION?
In Figure 5B–5, we can see clearly that it is just the particles on the outside that can collide
with the other reactant in solution. However, as the surface area increases moving from
left to right across the figure, the number of particles that are available to participate in
collisions also increases.
Similar to concentration and gas pressure, an increased surface area doesn’t affect the
energy of the particles, nor the orientation that they collide in. However, once again, the
fact that there are more collisions (that is, a higher collision frequency) means that there are
more chances for a successful reaction to occur.
Temperature and rate of reaction
Relationship: An increase in temperature leads to an increased rate of reaction.
Explanation: Up until this point, the factors we have considered have affected the reaction
rate by increasing the collision frequency. The effect of temperature requires us to
understand an additional factor – the energy of collisions.
So why does an increased temperature lead to an increased rate of reaction? To answer this,
we must refer to collision theory. A summary of this is provided in Table 5B–4.
Table 5B–4 The effect of an increased temperature on the different aspects of collision theory
Collision theory Effect of increased temperature
Particles must collide Increased collision frequency
Particles must collide with sufficient energy Increased collisions with sufficient energy
Particles must collide in the correct orientation No effect
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
5B FACTORS AFFECTING REACTION RATE
163
For particles in a reaction mixture, as the temperature is increased, the added heat provides
energy that they can use to move. This means that at higher temperatures, there are more
particles that have higher amounts of kinetic energy. This can be represented through a
graph known as a Maxwell–Boltzmann distribution curve (Figure 5B–6).
T3
Proportion of molecules with
particular energy
T1
T2
Temperature
T2 > T1 > T3
Energy
Figure 5B–6 A Maxwell–Boltzmann distribution curve showing that the proportion of molecules with
higher energies increases as temperature increases
In Table 5B–4, we noted that this increase in kinetic energy of particles that results from an
increase in temperature has two important outcomes on the rate of reaction.
1 As particles are moving around with greater energy, they are more likely to collide. This
leads to an increased collision frequency.
2 As the particles that are colliding are likely to have greater energy due to the increase
in temperature, these collisions are also more likely to be successful. This is because
this increased energy means that a larger proportion of particles are colliding
with energy greater than the activation energy. We can also represent this using a
Maxwell–Boltzmann distribution curve (Figure 5B–7).
Maxwell–Boltzmann distribution curve
Ea
Proportion of molecules
Activation
energy
T2
T1
T2 >
T1
Energy
Figure 5B–7 At higher temperatures, there are more particles that have energy greater than the
activation energy (Ea). At T1, only particles in the purple shaded region would have sufficient energy
to successfully react if they collided. However, at T2, collisions between any of the particles in
the purple and orange regions would have sufficient energy to react.This helps explain why higher
temperatures result in an increased rate of reaction.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
164 CHAPTER 5 RATES OF REACTION
VIDEO
WORKED
EXAMPLE 5B–1
Worked example 5B–1: Comparing rate of reaction graphs
You are provided with a graph (on the right) that has
two curves showing the rate of reaction at 10°C and
30°C. However, the curves are not labelled. Determine
which curve corresponds to which experiment and
explain your reasoning.
Concentration (M)
Solution
Time (s)
Logic Process
Step 1 Identify the factor that is
being changed that will
affect the rate of reaction.
In this experiment, the factor is temperature.
Reactions are occurring at 10°C and 30°C.
Step 2 Recall the relationship
between the factor and the
rate of reaction.
An increase in temperature results in an
increase in the rate of reaction.
Step 3 Identify which curve on the
graph displays a greater rate
of reaction.
The red curve represents a faster rate of
reaction, as it has a steeper slope.
Step 4 Piece together Steps 1–3 to
answer the question.
The red curve is the faster reaction, so it must
be the one that occurs at 30°C, as a higher
temperature leads to a higher rate of reaction.
This means that the green curve is the reaction
taking place at 10°C.
Catalyst
a substance
that increases
the rate of
a chemical
reaction by
lowering the
activation energy
by providing
an alternative
reaction pathway
and is itself
not consumed
as part of the
reaction
Catalysts and rate of reaction
Relationship: The presence of a catalyst leads to an increased rate of reaction.
Explanation: Catalysts speed up the rate of a reaction by providing an alternative reaction
pathway with a lower activation energy. This means that when the reaction occurs via the
catalyst, the reactants need less energy for a successful reaction. This can be illustrated
using an energy profile diagram (Figure 5B–8).
Ea
Ea cat
PRODUCTS
Energy
REACTANTS
Progress of reaction
Figure 5B–8 A catalyst provides an alternative reaction pathway that lowers the activation energy
of a reaction (purple dotted line) compared to the uncatalysed reaction (blue line).
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
5B FACTORS AFFECTING REACTION RATE
165
For all the other adjustable factors, we have explained their impact on the rate of reaction
by linking them back to the factors that comprise collision theory. This is a little bit more
difficult to do when discussing the effect that a catalyst has, as it potentially creates a
situation that changes both the collision frequency and the number of collisions that have
the correct orientation. However, the chemistry behind those two outcomes is beyond the
scope of this course.
However, the one aspect of collision theory that is clearly altered as a result of including
a catalyst in a chemical reaction is the number of collisions that have sufficient energy to
react. Similar to temperature, this can be highlighted through using a Maxwell–Boltzmann
distribution curve (Figure 5B–9).
Proportion of molecules
Activation energy
in presence of
catalyst
Activation energy
without catalyst
Ea cat
Ea
Energy
Figure 5B–9 Catalysed and uncatalysed activation energies on a Maxwell–Boltzmann distribution curve.
Without a catalyst, only the particles in the blue shaded area will have sufficient energy to react.
However, with a catalyst present, the particles in both the green and blue shaded areas will have
sufficient energy to react.
In Figure 5B–9, without a catalyst, only the particles in the blue shaded area have sufficient
energy to react. In the presence of a catalyst, all the particles in both the green and blue
shaded areas would have sufficient energy to react.
This shows us that raising the temperature and including a catalyst both speed up the
rate of a reaction by increasing the proportion of collisions that have sufficient energy to
react (that is, energy greater than the activation energy). However, it is important to note
the distinction between how they do this. This can be understood through the following
simple analogy.
Let us assume that you have an upcoming chemistry test and the teachers have said that
everyone who gets above 80% will be allowed to go on an excursion to the museum. A
practice test is held the week before and only one student scores above 80%. Knowing that
the school cannot run an excursion for just a single student, the teachers come up with two
strategies to ensure that higher marks are achieved on the real test. These plans are:
1 Run after school tutorials on the test topic every day for the next week. With this extra
help, more students should get above 80% on the test. This is the equivalent of raising
the temperature of a reaction – it ensures that more particles have sufficient energy to
overcome the activation energy.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
166 CHAPTER 5 RATES OF REACTION
Heterogeneous
a mixture
composed of
substances in
different states
or phases
Homogeneous
a mixture
composed of
substances in
the same state
or phase
2 Decide that a score of only 60% is required to go on the excursion, so that more students
end up with a grade that allows them to go to the museum. This is the equivalent
of using a catalyst – the activation energy is lower and so the threshold required for
particles to react is also lower, which means that more particles have sufficient energy.
There are two types of catalysts – heterogeneous and homogeneous – and they differ based
on their state compared with the reactants (Figure 5B–10). Zinc, for example, is the solid
metal coating used in catalytic converters of cars and is considered a heterogeneous
catalyst, as the reactants it facilitates are the gases emitted from fuel combustion.
Adenosine triphosphate, or ATP, is considered a homogeneous catalyst in biological
systems, as both it and the reactions it facilitates are aqueous in nature.
Homogeneous Heterogeneous
Aqueous solution
with aqueous catalyst
Aqueous solution
with solid catalyst
Figure 5B–10 Homogeneous catalysis occurs when both the catalyst and reactants are in the same
phase (left), whereas heterogeneous catalysis occurs across different phases, such as aqueous
reactants and a solid catalyst (right).
WORKSHEET
5B–1
ANALYSING
RATES OF
REACTION DATA
12B ENZYMES
DOC
LINK
Catalysts, like the reactions they facilitate, can also be limited in their ability to work.
Anything that alters the state of the catalyst affects it negatively (for example, rust affecting
the surface area of a catalyst in a car catalytic converter). What this means is that all
catalysts, both chemical and biological, have optimum conditions under which they work.
These conditions include temperature, pH and oxidative state, to name a few. When we
hear of a reaction that uses a catalyst, we should also consider the optimum conditions for
the catalyst so it can have its effect. This will be discussed in more detail in Section 12B.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
5B FACTORS AFFECTING REACTION RATE
167
5B SKILLS
Structuring answers to questions
You will have noticed throughout this section that there was a clear emphasis placed on
how to explain the relationship between different reaction conditions and their effect on
the rate of a given reaction. While adopting a clear process like this should be beneficial
for your understanding, it is also a helpful method to use for structuring your responses
to questions.
This can be clearer by looking at a question and two potential answers for it.
Question:
Describe and explain the relationship between temperature and rate of reaction.
Answer 1:
Temperature impacts on the rate of reaction. If the temperature is higher, the rate of
reaction will change and become faster. When the temperature is higher, more particles
will have sufficient energy to react. This will increase the rate of reaction. Also, there will
be an increased collision frequency, which will also cause the rate of reaction to increase.
At higher temperatures, more particles will have greater kinetic energy. This means they
will collide more often and with more energy.
Answer 2:
An increase in temperature leads to an increase in the rate of reaction. At higher
temperatures, more particles will have greater kinetic energy. This results in an increase
in reaction rate for two reasons. Firstly, as particles are moving more rapidly, they will
collide more often. This results in an increased collision frequency and so more chances
for a successful reaction to occur. Secondly, as particles have greater kinetic energy,
this means that there will be more particles that have sufficient energy to react (that is,
energy greater than the activation energy of the reaction). Both of these factors combine
to contribute to the increased rate of reaction seen at higher temperatures.
While you can see that both answer 1 and answer 2 contain quite similar information
regarding the relationship between temperature and rate of reaction, there is a clear
difference in terms of how well they are structured. Answer 2 contains a much clearer
structure, which effectively links all of the concepts together in an ordered fashion.
Having your answers well structured like this makes it much easier for anyone assessing
your work to see your understanding of the topic and provide you with full marks for
the question.
Section 5B questions
1 List the reaction conditions that affect the following aspects of collision theory.
a collision frequency
b collisions with energy greater than the activation energy
2 For the following pairs, identify which would result in a faster reaction (assuming all
other conditions were constant).
a a large block of aluminium versus aluminium ‘chips’
b room temperature versus in the fridge
c 0.01 M sodium hydroxide versus 100 mM sodium hydroxide
d 25 mL container versus 0.25 L container
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
168 CHAPTER 5 RATES OF REACTION
3 Cellular respiration involves the breakdown of glucose to produce carbon dioxide,
water and energy in the form of ATP. To test different reaction conditions on the
cellular respiration of yeast, an experiment is set up to capture the carbon dioxide that is
released.
The data recorded from this experiment is as follows.
0 mins 2 mins 4 mins 6 mins 8 mins 10 mins
Exp #1 0.00 mL 2.87 mL 5.05 mL 6.15 mL 6.45 mL 6.5 mL
Exp #2 0.00 mL 2.92 mL 5.01 mL 6.18 mL 6.45 mL 6.52 mL
Exp #3 0.00 mL 2.91 mL 4.99 mL 6.16 mL 6.48 mL 6.49 mL
a Draw a graph that represents these data.
b On your graph, draw and label the result you would expect to observe if the
experiment was repeated with yeast that were missing the enzyme that acts as a
catalyst for this reaction. You can assume that the reaction can still occur without the
enzyme present.
c Describe the difference between a homogeneous and heterogeneous catalyst.
4 Calcium carbonate reacts with hydrochloric acid according to the following equation:
CaCO3(s) + 2HCl(aq) → CaCl2(aq) + H2O(l) + CO2(g)
The graph below shows the reaction that occurs when 500 mL of 3.64 M hydrochloric
acid is added to 385 g of powdered calcium carbonate at room temperature.
40
Decrease in mass (grams)
30
20
10
0
60
120 180 240 300 360 420
Time (seconds)
Copy the graph above and sketch the graph that you would expect if each of the
following changes were made.
a A catalyst is added.
b The HCl is heated to 50°C before it is used.
c 4.50 M HCl is used.
d 0.50 M HCl is used.
e 500 g of CaCO3 is used.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
169
Chapter 5 review
Summary
Create your own set of summary notes for this chapter, on paper or in a digital document. A model
summary is provided in the Teacher Resources and can be used to compare with yours.
Checklist
In the Interactive Textbook, the success criteria are linked from the review questions and will be
automatically ticked when answers are correct. Alternatively, print or photocopy this page and tick
the boxes when you have answered the corresponding questions correctly.
Success criteria – I am now able to: Linked questions
5A.1  Differentiate between open and closed systems 5A.2  Outline how reactions proceed differently in open and
closed systems
5A.3 5A.4  Describe the factors that comprise collision theory  Describe how the rate of a reaction can be monitored 5B.1 5B.2 5B.3 5B.4 5B.5 5B.6 5B.7 5B.8  Explain the relationship between concentration and rate
of reaction
 Explain the relationship between gas pressure and rate
of reaction
 Explain the relationship between surface area and rate
of reaction
 Explain the relationship between temperature and rate
of reaction
 Outline the effect of temperature on the rate of reaction
using a Maxwell–Boltzmann distribution curve
 Explain the relationship between the presence of a catalyst
and rate of reaction
 Outline the effect of a catalyst on the rate of reaction using
an energy profile diagram
 Outline the effect of a catalyst on the rate of reaction using
a Maxwell–Boltzmann distribution curve
1☐
3☐, 13☐
2☐, 10☐, 12☐
8☐, 13☐
13☐
3☐, 12☐
7☐, 12☐
3☐, 6☐, 11☐, 12☐, 13☐
4☐, 11☐
3☐, 5☐, 11☐, 13☐
11☐
9☐, 11☐
Multiple-choice questions
1 The biggest difference between an open and a closed system is that
A an open system lets in heat, whereas a closed system does not.
B a closed system lets in heat, whereas an open system does not.
C compounds produced in an open system can be released into the surroundings.
D compounds produced in a closed system can be released into the surroundings.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
170
2 Which of the following is not a requirement for a reaction to occur?
A reactant particles colliding
B reactant particles colliding in the correct orientation
C reactant particles colliding with energy greater than the enthalpy
D reactant particles colliding with energy greater than the activation energy
3 In the below equation, monitoring the production of carbon dioxide is a valid way to measure
the rate of reaction.
CH4(g) + 2O2(g) → CO2(g) + 2H2O(g)
Which of the following would make this difficult?
A performing the reaction using a catalyst
B performing the reaction at room temperature
C performing the reaction at low gas pressures
D performing the reaction in an open system
4 You are provided with a Maxwell–Boltzmann distribution curve that shows the distributions of
particles at 4°C and 25°C. Which statement is most accurate about the 4°C peak compared to
the 25°C peak?
A It will be lower and shifted to the left.
B It will be lower and shifted to the right.
C It will be higher and shifted to the left.
D It will be higher and shifted to the right.
5 Which of the following combinations is true for a reaction in the presence of a catalyst?
Reaction rate Activation energy
A Lower Lower
B Higher Higher
C Higher Lower
D Lower Higher
6 Which of the following statements is true regarding the behaviour of particles that are moved
from a high temperature to a low temperature?
A Their average kinetic energy will increase.
B Their frequency of collisions will increase.
C Their Maxwell–Boltzmann distribution curve will flatten out.
D Their collisions are less likely to lead to a successful reaction.
7 You perform an experiment in which three beakers are set up with 50 mL of an aqueous
solution of 0.1 M hydrochloric acid. Into beaker 1, you add magnesium powder. Into beaker 2,
you add magnesium ribbon. Into beaker 3, you add a single block of magnesium. The mass of
magnesium in all beakers is the same.
Which beaker would have the fastest rate of reaction?
A beaker 1
B beaker 2
C beaker 3
D The rate would be equal in all beakers.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
171
8 You perform an experiment in which the reaction creates hydrogen gas as a product. To
monitor the rate, you measure the volume of gas that is produced and record it after the
reaction is completed. The best reason that this is not an effective way to measure reaction
rate is because
A a gas product cannot be used to calculate rate.
B the measurements were not taken over time.
C it does not take into account the temperature of the room.
D the volume of hydrogen at the end of the reaction would be too small to measure
accurately.
9 On a Maxwell–Boltzmann distribution curve, in relation to an uncatalysed activation energy, a
catalysed activation energy would appear
A to the left on the x-axis.
B to the right on the x-axis.
C lower on the y-axis.
D higher on the y-axis.
10 Which of the following statements regarding collision theory is correct?
A Particles colliding with sufficient energy and an incorrect orientation will result in a
successful reaction.
B Particles colliding with energy lower than the activation energy and the correct orientation
will result in a successful reaction.
C Particles colliding with energy greater than the activation energy and the incorrect
orientation will result in a successful reaction.
D Particles colliding with sufficient energy and the correct orientation will result in a
successful reaction.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
172
Short-answer questions
11 A chemical reaction was performed that resulted in an aqueous solution going from colourless
to dark blue. Your lab partner performed the experiment at two different temperatures to
observe the effect that this had on the rate of reaction. All other variables were kept constant.
Your partner produced the data table below, which shows their observation of the colour
change every minute for 10 minutes (+ = colourless, +++++ = dark blue).
0 min 1 min 2 min 3 min 4 min 5 min 6 min 7 min 8 min 9 min 10 min
T1 + + ++ +++ +++ ++++ +++++ +++++ +++++ +++++ +++++
T2 + + + + ++ ++ ++ ++ +++ +++
+++ a Unfortunately, your lab partner didn’t note what sample was at what temperature and only
recorded T1 and T2. Based on the data, state what you can say about the two temperatures
and justify your answer.  (2 marks)
b Draw a fully labelled Maxwell–Boltzmann distribution curve for the reacting particles in
the samples at T1 and T2.  (3 marks)
c Using your diagram from part b, explain the results observed in the experiment.  (4 marks)
d You perform the same experiment as your partner; however, you decide to add a catalyst
and observe the results. A colourless aqueous catalyst is added to beaker 2, while the same
volume of water is added to beaker 1. Describe what you would observe in both beakers. 
 (1 mark)
e Draw an energy profile diagram that illustrates the effect that the presence of a catalyst has
on this reaction. It is known that the reaction is endothermic. (3 marks)
f Describe the effect that a catalyst has on the rate of a reaction. (2 marks)
g Using a Maxwell–Boltzmann distribution curve, explain how a catalyst has the effect
described in part f. (4 marks)
12 One of the most fundamental chemical reactions in nature is the one that produces water,
shown by the equation below.
2H2(g) + O2(g) → 2H2O(l)
a Using collision theory, describe what must happen for water to be produced. (3 marks)
b State two ways that you could increase the rate of this reaction by increasing the
collision frequency. (2 marks)
c Explain why increasing the surface area is not a viable way to increase the rate of
this reaction. (2 marks)
13 Solid calcium carbonate reacts with aqueous solutions of hydrochloric acid to produce
calcium chloride, water and carbon dioxide.
a Write a balanced equation for this reaction. (1 mark)
The graph on the following page shows the rate of the reaction, as measured by a loss of mass
in grams recorded at 60 second intervals, when 500 mL of 3.64 M hydrochloric acid is added to
385 g of powdered calcium carbonate at room temperature.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
173
40
Decrease in mass (g)
30
20
10
0
10
2 3 4 5 6 7
Time (mins)
b What does the method of measurement for the rate of this reaction tell you about
the system it must be occurring in? c On a copy of the graph above, sketch what you expect to observe if the following
changes were made.
i A catalyst is added. ii The hydrochloric acid is heated to 50°C before it is used. iii 4.50 M hydrochloric acid is used. iv 0.50 M hydrochloric acid is used. v 500 g of calcium carbonate is used. (2 marks)
(1 mark)
(1 mark)
(1 mark)
(1 mark)
(1 mark)
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
174
UNIT
3
HOW CAN DESIGN AND INNOVATION HELP TO
OPTIMISE CHEMICAL PROCESSES?
CHAPTER
6
EQUILIBRIUM
Introduction
We already know that reactions occur all around us and can occur at different
speeds, some fast and some slow. This chapter will examine the nature of these
reactions and how they can be optimised to control the amount of product
produced. Until now, reactions have been represented as only going in one direction;
however, in reality, almost all reactions are reversible and seek to achieve a state of
equilibrium. In this chapter, we will gain an appreciation for the concept of equilibrium
and how changing conditions can alter its position. You will also learn about the
equilibrium constant and reaction quotient and how these can be used to understand
what is happening at any given timepoint in a reversible reaction.
Curriculum
Area of Study 2 Outcome 2
How can the rate and yield of chemical reactions be optimised?
Study Design: Learning intentions – at the end of the chapter I will be
able to:
INTRODUCTION
VIDEO
EQUILIBRIUM
• The distinction between
reversible and irreversible
reactions and between rate
and extent of a reaction
• The dynamic nature of
homogeneous equilibria involving
aqueous solutions or gases and
their representation by balanced
chemical or thermochemical
equations (including states) and
by concentration–time graphs
6A What is equilibrium?
6A.1  State the difference between reversible and
irreversible reactions
6A.2  Explain the difference between rate of reaction
and extent of reaction
6A.3 Define ‘dynamic equilibrium’
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
Study Design: •
•
Calculations involving
equilibrium expressions
(including units) for a closed
homogeneous equilibrium
system and the dependence
of the equilibrium constant (K)
value on the system temperature
and the equation used to
represent the reaction
The reaction quotient (Q) as
a quantitative measure of the
extent of a chemical reaction:
that is, the relative amounts of
products and reactants present
during a reaction at a given point
in time
•
•
•
•
The dynamic nature of
homogeneous equilibria involving
aqueous solutions or gases and
their representation by balanced
chemical or thermochemical
equations (including states) and
by concentration–time graphs
The change in position of
equilibrium that can occur
when changes in temperature or
species or volume (concentration
or pressure) are applied to a
system at equilibrium, and the
representation of these changes
using concentration–time graphs
Calculations involving
equilibrium expressions
(including units) for a closed
homogeneous equilibrium
system and the dependence
of the equilibrium constant (K)
value on the system temperature
and the equation used to
represent the reaction
The application of Le Châtelier’s
principle to identify factors that
favour the yield of a chemical
reaction
175
Learning intentions – at the end of the chapter I will be
able to:
6B 6B.1 6B.2 6B.3 6B.4 6B.5 The reaction quotient and equilibrium constant
State the expression for the equilibrium constant
 Determine the position of equilibrium, based on
the value of K
 Use the equilibrium expression to calculate the
value of K or the equilibrium concentration of a
reactant or product
 Calculate the reaction quotient, including units,
for a given equilibrium system
 Determine how the position of equilibrium shifts
using values of Q and K
6C Le Châtelier’s principle
6C.1 State Le Châtelier’s principle
6C.2  Predict the effect of changes in temperature on
the position of equilibrium using Le Châtelier’s
principle
6C.3  Determine the effect of temperature on the
equilibrium constant
6C.4  Predict the effect of a change in volume on
the position of equilibrium using Le Châtelier’s
principle
6C.5  Predict the effect of adding or removing a
reactant or product on the position of equilibrium
by using Le Châtelier’s principle
6C.6  Sketch a concentration–time graph to represent a
given equilibrium system
6C.7  Interpret concentration–time graphs to determine
changes made to an equilibrium system
6C.8  Determine the factors that maximise yield in a
given equilibrium system using Le Châtelier’s
principle
6C.9  Identify potential conflicts between reaction rate
and producing equilibrium reaction products in a
given equilibrium system
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
176
Study Design: Learning intentions – at the end of the chapter I will be
able to:
•
Responses to the conflict
between optimal rate and
temperature considerations in
producing equilibrium reaction
products, with reference to
the green chemistry principles
of catalysis and designing for
energy efficiency
6C.10 6C.11 6C.12  Describe the green chemistry principle of
catalysis
 Describe the green chemistry principle of
designing for energy efficiency
 Explain how the green chemistry principles of
catalysis and designing for energy efficiency can
solve conflicts between optimal reaction rate
and producing equilibrium reaction products in
equilibrium systems
VCE Chemistry Study Design extracts © VCAA; reproduced by permission.
Glossary
Dynamic equilibrium
Equilibrium
Equilibrium constant
Extent of reaction
Homogeneous equilibrium
Irreversible reaction
Le Châtelier’s principle
Position of equilibrium
Reaction quotient
Reversible reaction
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
177﻿ CONCEPT MAP
Concept map
Forward reaction
6A What is equilibrium?
Understanding the concept of
reversible chemical reactions
A + B
Reverse reaction
C + D
Reversible reaction
A + B
C + D
A + B
C + D
6B The reaction quotient and
equilibrium constant
Calculations to determine the
position of a reversible reaction at
any given moment
6C Le Châtelier's principle
Understanding how a change in
reaction conditions, such as temperature
and pressure, impact the position
of equilibrium
Equilibrium
re-established
aA + bB ⇌ cC + dD
[C]c[D]d
K =
[A]a[B]b
Concentration (M)
N2
O2
NO2
N2 added
Time
See the Interactive Textbook for an interactive version of this concept map
interlinked with all concept maps for the course.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
178 CHAPTER 6 EQUILIBRIUM
6A
What is equilibrium?
Study Design:
•
The distinction between reversible and
irreversible reactions and between rate and
extent of a reaction
•
The dynamic nature of homogenous equilibria
involving aqueous solutions or gases and
their representation by balanced chemical or
thermochemical equations (including states)
and by concentration–time graphs
Glossary:
Dynamic equilibrium
Equilibrium
Extent of reaction
Homogeneous equilibrium
Irreversible reaction
Position of equilibrium
Reversible reaction
ENGAGE
Cooking – an irreversible reaction
Cooking food is a great everyday example
of chemical reactions taking place. When
you place an egg in boiling water, for
example, reactions are taking place that
convert the runny, raw egg into the cooked
version that you see here. Importantly,
once you have cooked the egg, you can’t
turn it back into a raw egg and undo that
process by placing it in the fridge or freezer.
Initially, scientists believed that this was
the only way reactions worked – reactants
were turned into products and this process was final. However, in this section, you are
going to learn that many chemical reactions are in fact reversible. You will learn the
difference between reversible and irreversible reactions, as well as begin to understand
that reversible reactions seek a balanced outcome, known as equilibrium.
Reversible
reaction
a reaction that
can proceed in
both directions:
from reactants
to products and
products to
reactants
EXPLAIN
Reversible and irreversible reactions
When we have looked at chemical equations and reactions so far, they have operated from
left to right: reactants are used up and products are formed. However, in many situations
the products of a reaction can also interact and form the original reactants. When a
reaction can proceed in either direction, it is called a reversible reaction. In reversible
reactions, the formation of products is called the forward reaction and the formation of the
initial reactants is called the reverse, or backwards, reaction. To express the simultaneous
reactions occurring forwards and backwards, two half-arrows are used rather than a
single arrow.
Forward reaction
A + B
C + D
Reverse reaction
C + D
A + B
Reversible reaction
A + B
C + D
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
6A WHAT IS EQUILIBRIUM?
179
In a closed system (so no reactants or products enter or escape), reversible reactions reach
a state known as equilibrium. This is where the concentrations of reactants and products
do not change. However, this does not mean there is no movement in the reaction.
In equilibrium systems, there is still movement but the forward and reverse reactions
are occurring at the same rate. This state of constant, equal movement is known as
dynamic equilibrium.
Many equilibrium systems in chemistry are dynamic, which means the following occur:
• All equilibrium reactions are incomplete, as both reactants and products are present at
equilibrium.
• Bonds are constantly being made and broken – for both products and reactants.
• Energy is being transformed and used in the making and breaking of bonds.
This doesn’t mean that irreversible reactions do not exist. There are lots of examples where
reactions occur and their reverse reaction does not, such as the combustion of fossil fuels.
Similarly, burning wood is impossible to ‘un-burn’.
Equilibrium
the state in
which the
concentration
of reactants and
products does
not change
Dynamic
equilibrium
when the
forward and
reverse reactions
are occurring at
the same non-
zero rate
Irreversible
reaction
a unidirectional
reaction where
the reactants
are converted
to products,
which cannot
react further
to produce
the starting
compounds
again
Figure 6A–1 Rechargeable batteries and maintaining swimming pools both rely on reversible
chemical reactions.
Extent of reaction versus rate of reaction
As we saw in Chapter 5, the rate of a chemical reaction represents the speed at
which reactants are consumed and products are formed. It describes how quickly the
concentrations of reactants and products change over time. Factors such as temperature,
concentration, surface area and catalysts can influence the rate of a reaction. It is commonly
expressed as the change in concentration of a reactant or product per unit of time.
The extent of reaction, however, refers to the degree to which the reaction proceeds towards
completion. It tells us the amount of reactants that have been converted into products at a
particular point in time.
To assess the extent of the reaction, we need to examine the relative concentrations of the
reactants and products. If the concentrations of reactants are high and the concentrations
of products are low, it suggests that the reaction has not proceeded significantly towards
the product side. Conversely, if the concentrations of reactants are low and the
concentrations of products are high, it indicates that the reaction has proceeded
significantly towards the product side. Performing this assessment allows us to determine
the position of equilibrium of a reaction and whether reactants or products are favoured
at a given moment or concentration.
LINK CHAPTER 5
Extent of
reaction
the degree
to which a
reaction goes to
completion
Position of
equilibrium
a quantitative
measure of the
relative amounts
of reactants
and products in
an equilibrium
system
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
180 CHAPTER 6 EQUILIBRIUM
Homogeneous
equilibrium
an equilibrium
system where all
of the reactants
and products
are in the same
phase Characteristics of an equilibrium system
There are five main characteristics of an equilibrium system:
• The reaction occurs in a closed system.
• The rate of forward and reverse reactions are equal.
• At equilibrium, there is a mixture of reactants and products.
• The concentrations of reactants and products are constant.
• The macroscopic properties appear constant.
Homogeneous equilibria
Equilibrium reactions can occur in many ways. In this chapter, we are going to focus on
homogeneous equilibrium, which occurs between reactants and products that are in the same
phase. In all of the equilibrium systems that you encounter in this course, the reactions will
be homogeneous.
6A SKILLS
Precise language
One of the things that will be incredibly important throughout this chapter is making
sure that you always use precise and correct language. As you will have seen through the
listed characteristics of a system at dynamic equilibrium, there are very specific criteria
that must be met. Considering this, you also must be very particular about how you
describe them. Let’s look at the following two statements that may be used to describe a
system at equilibrium:
1
At equilibrium, the concentration of reactants and products are the same.
2 At equilibrium, the concentration of reactants and products are constant.
While these two statements seem very similar, only one of them is correct. Indeed, the
only difference between them is that one says the concentrations are ‘the same’ and the
other says they are ‘constant’. While you might argue that if things stay the same, they
stay constant … that is not what the sentences say! With this wording, statement 1 is
incorrect and statement 2 is correct.
A good way to ensure that you word answers correctly is to consistently use the appropriate
terminology whenever you are writing about equilibrium. This includes writing notes, flash
cards and practice answers. As the old saying goes, ‘practice makes perfect’!
Section 6A questions
1 Provide two differences between reversible and irreversible reactions.
2 Using an example, explain how the extent of a reaction is apparent.
3 Explain the difference between rate of reaction and extent of reaction.
4 What is meant by the term ‘homogeneous equilibrium’?
5 Are the following statements regarding a system at dynamic equilibrium true or false?
a The reactions have stopped.
b The concentration of reactants and products are always equal.
c The rate of the forward and reverse reactions are equal.
d The equilibrium only ends once all the reactants have been used up.
e If the reaction resulted in a colour change, the colour would remain constant while
at equilibrium.
6 For the homogeneous equilibrium reaction: 2NO2(g) ⇌ N2O4(g), describe what is
happening at the molecular level when the system is at dynamic equilibrium.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
6B THE REACTION QUOTIENT AND EQUILIBRIUM CONSTANT
181
6B
The reaction quotient and
equilibrium constant
Study Design:
•
Calculations involving equilibrium expressions
(including units) for a closed homogeneous
equilibrium system and the dependence of the
equilibrium constant (K) value on the system
temperature and the equation used to represent
the reaction
•
The reaction quotient (Q) as a quantitative measure
of the extent of a chemical reaction: that is, the
relative amounts of products and reactants present
during a reaction at a given point in time
Glossary:
Equilibrium constant
Reaction quotient
ENGAGE
From salt lakes to drug development
The concept of equilibrium was first raised in 1803 by a French chemist, Claude Louis
Berthollet, after observations he made while studying sodium carbonate formation at
the edge of salt lakes. However, it wasn’t until 1864 that these findings were advanced
into a mathematical relationship by Cato Guldberg and Peter Waage, who proposed
the ‘law of mass action’. In equilibrium reactions, this law encompasses the equilibrium
expression, which is the topic of this section. This expression has been critically
important in pharmacology, as it is used routinely to investigate the physiological
impacts of medications, by looking at factors like dose–response curves or the rate at
which a drug may bind to a receptor in the body. In this section, you will learn more
about the equilibrium constant, K, as well as the reaction quotient, Q, how they relate to
each other and how you can perform calculations for both.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
182 CHAPTER 6 EQUILIBRIUM
CHAPTER 5
LINK
EXPLAIN
Locating equilibrium
In Chapter 5, you learned that reactions have rates. For reactions that have reached
equilibrium, they appear to have ‘no rate’ because the rates of the forward and reverse
reactions are equal. This doesn’t mean that the concentrations of products and reactants
are equal – the extent of the reaction gives us the final position of the reaction once it has
reached equilibrium.
The easiest way to view this is by observing the concentration versus time graph for a
given reaction. Let’s consider the reaction between N2 and O2 as they form NO2. As
mentioned in the previous section, a two-directional arrow indicates that the reaction
is reversible.
Equilibrium
reached
Reaction quotient
the measurement
of the relative
amounts of
products and
reactants in a
given reaction;
symbol Q
N2(g) + 2O2(g) ⇌ 2NO2(g)
The reaction between N2 and O2 to form NO2 can be
measured graphically by plotting the concentration
of the different species over time, as in Figure 6B–1.
As time increases, the concentrations reach a constant
level; at this point the reaction has reached equilibrium.
Concentration
Another way this can be considered is by viewing the
rate of the forward and backward reactions side by
side, as in Figure 6B–2.
Here, we can see the initial rate of the forward
reaction is very high, as there are only reactants, but
this decreases over time. However, once products are
formed, the rate of the reverse reaction increases and
eventually plateaus. At the point where both rates
are equal and constant, equilibrium is reached.
The reaction quotient, Q
The reaction quotient represents the ratio of
molecules participating in a reaction at any given
timepoint. We can think about a generalised
chemical equation being represented as:
aA + bB ⇌ cC + dD
where A and B are the reactants, C and D are the
products and the lower case letters represent their
coefficients in a balanced equation.
N2 + 2O2 → 2NO2
Rate
2NO2 → N2 + 2O2
Time
Figure 6B–2 A rate–time graph of the
forward (green) and backward (red)
reactions for the equilibrium system
N2 + 2O2 ⇌ 2NO2
The reaction quotient, represented by the symbol Q, for this reaction can be expressed as:
[C]c[D]d
Q =
[A]a[B]b
As you can see from this expression, the reaction quotient is the concentrations of the
products raised to the powers of their coefficients, divided by the concentrations of the
reactants raised to the power of their coefficients.
N2
NO2
O2
Time
Figure 6B–1 A concentration–time
graph of the reaction N2 + 2O2 ⇌ 2NO2
Equilibrium
reached
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
6B THE REACTION QUOTIENT AND EQUILIBRIUM CONSTANT
183
As an example, if we have the reaction between nitrogen gas and oxygen gas to produce
NO2:
N2(g) + 2O2(g) ⇌ 2NO2(g)
The reaction quotient for this reaction will be expressed as:
[NO2]2
Q =
[N2][O2]2
Note that powers in the expression match the stoichiometries of the initial reaction. The
value of Q for this reaction, based on reactant and product concentrations at different
timepoints, is calculated in Table 6B–1.
Table 6B–1 Calculating the reaction quotient from the stoichiometries
of the reaction
Time (s) [N2] [O2] [NO2] Q
1 0.05 0.10 0.00001 2 × 10–7
10 0.02 0.04 0.06 1.13 × 102
20 0.01 0.02 0.13 4.23 × 103
Notice how at different timepoints within the reaction, the reaction quotient can give
different values. This is because the reaction hasn’t yet reached equilibrium. Once
the system does reach equilibrium, Q becomes constant. To differentiate between a
system in dynamic equilibrium and one that is not, this constant is referred to as the
equilibrium constant.
The equilibrium constant, K
The equilibrium constant, K (sometimes also expressed as K
c), is expressed in exactly the
same way as the reaction quotient. The only difference is, because the reaction has reached
equilibrium, the value is a constant and always applies for that particular reaction under
the given conditions. However, it is important to note that changing the temperature will
change the value of the equilibrium constant. You will learn more about this in Section 6C.
Let us reconsider what we know about equilibrium thus far:
• It occurs when the rates of the forward and reverse reactions are equal.
• The observed concentrations of reactants and products are constant.
• It represents a macroscopically unchanging system, despite the system being dynamic at
the atomic level.
Using the concentrations of the reactants and products at equilibrium, we can calculate the
equilibrium constant by using the same generalised equation as for the reaction quotient.
This is shown by the following expression:
aA + bB ⇌ cC + dD
[C]c[D]d
K =
Equilibrium
constant
the value of the
reaction quotient
at equilibrium;
symbol K
LINK
6C LE
CHÂTELIER’S
PRINCIPLE
[A]a[B]b
For example, given the equation below:
N2(g) + 2O2(g) ⇌ 2NO2(g)
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
184 CHAPTER 6 EQUILIBRIUM
We can determine K for known
concentrations of reactants and
products using the following
expression:
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
Equilibrium reached
Concentration (M)
K =
[NO2]2
[N2][O2]2
We can also see how prior to reaching
the equilibrium point, we can calculate
the reaction quotient using the same
formula. This is why data collection of
reactant and product concentrations
with time is a common way to measure
both Q and K.
O2 = 0.4 M 2
N2 = 0.3 M
2
NO2 = 0.2 M
2
10
0 20 30 40 50
Time (s)
Figure 6B–3 This graph of concentration versus time
for the reaction between N2 and O2 to form NO2
allows for the calculation of K, as the values of each
concentration are known.
Units of the reaction quotient and equilibrium constant
Previously, we have discussed most measurements as having definitive units. We measure
concentration in moles per litre, temperature in degrees Celsius or Kelvin and pressure in
kilopascals or atmospheres. However, the units of the reaction quotient and equilibrium
constant are dependent on the specific reaction that they are representing. This is because
the units for Q and K are products of the stoichiometry of the reactants and the products
and their ratio. It is even possible to have a unitless value of K. To determine the correct
units, it is important to understand the laws of indices (which you may have learned
previously in maths). There are two rules you need to remember:
• When dividing indices with the same base, subtract the powers.
• When multiplying indices with the same base, add the powers.
Check-in questions – Set 1
1 Write the expression for the equilibrium constant and reaction quotient.
2 What is the difference between the equilibrium constant and the reaction quotient?
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
6B THE REACTION QUOTIENT AND EQUILIBRIUM CONSTANT
185
Calculating the equilibrium constant
The equilibrium constant can be calculated for almost any reaction if the concentration of
the species can be measured within the reaction. Worked examples 6B–1 and 6B–2 show
two calculation methods.
Worked example 6B–1: Calculating the equilibrium constant using
concentrations
VIDEO
WORKED
EXAMPLE 6B–1
When the conditions are right, such as when there is lightning, nitrogen and oxygen
gas can react to form nitrogen dioxide – a toxic gas in the upper atmosphere. If an
experiment is performed in a closed system where the energy of lightning is supplied,
calculate the value of the equilibrium constant if the equilibrium concentrations of
nitrogen, oxygen and nitrogen dioxide are 0.30 M, 0.40 M and 0.20 M respectively.
N2(g) + 2O2(g) ⇌ 2NO2(g)
Solution
Logic Process
Step 1 Write out the relevant information from the question. [N2] = 0.30 M
[O2] = 0.40 M
[NO2] = 0.20 M
Step 2 Write out the equilibrium constant expression. K =
[NO2]2
[N2][O2]2
Step 3 Substitute values into the equilibrium constant
expression. (0.20 M)2
K =
0.30 M × (0.40 M)2
Step 4 Solve for K, ensuring that units are correct by
applying index laws. 0.040 M2
Kc
=
0.048 M3
= 0.80 M–1
Calculations involving equilibrium
Now that we understand how K is calculated and its meaning, we need to consider what
we need to calculate K and how to derive it, based on knowledge from previous chapters
on stoichiometry and concentration. In Worked example 6B–1, the concentrations of
all reactants and products at equilibrium were provided. However, you will also need to
be able to solve problems in which these concentrations are not directly given. In these
circumstances, you are usually provided with a mixture of initial concentrations and
equilibrium concentrations. To be able to determine K in these types of questions, you need
to use your knowledge of stoichiometry. To help organise the different parts of information,
it is useful to use a technique known as an ICE (Initial, Change, Equilibrium) table.
Table 6B–2 shows an example of an ICE table for the following reaction:
A + 2B ⇌ 2C + D
Table 6B–2 Example ICE table
A 2B 2C D
Initial
Change
Equilibrium
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
186 CHAPTER 6 EQUILIBRIUM
This table would then be populated with the information given in the question, which you
can then use to fill in the blank squares. It is important to remember that to calculate K, you
need the equilibrium concentrations. Occasionally, you will be provided with values that
relate to another quantity, such as the amount in moles. In these instances, you will need to
convert them to molar concentrations. The following worked example shows the use of an
ICE table in a specific scenario.
VIDEO
WORKED
EXAMPLE 6B–2
Worked example 6B–2: Using stoichiometry to calculate K
Two gases, NO2 and N2O4, establish an equilibrium in a closed system at a specified
temperature, according to the following equation:
N2O4(g) ⇌ 2NO2(g)
A 0.27 mol sample of N2O4 was placed in a 1.0 L vessel. At equilibrium, there was only
0.14 mol of N2O4 remaining. Calculate the K for this reaction.
Solution
Logic Process
Step 1 Write the reaction and create
an ICE table.
N2O4(g) ⇌ 2NO2(g)
Step 2 Construct your ICE table and
fill in the given information.
I = 0.27 mol I = 0.00 mol
C = ? C = ?
E = 0.14 mol E = ?
Step 3 Convert all values to
concentrations using c =
n
V.
0.27 mol
I =
1.0 L
= 0.27 M
I =
0.00 mol
1.0 L
= 0.00 M
C = ? C = ?
E =
0.14 mol
1.0 L
= 0.14 M
E = ?
Step 4 Determine the change in
concentration of the substance
for which the equilibrium
concentration is known.
I = 0.27 M I = 0.00 M
C 
= I – E
= 0.27 M – 0.14 M
= 0.13 M
C = ?
E = 0.14 M E = ?
Step 5 Use molar ratios to determine
the change in concentration of
the other substance(s), ensuring
that the sign changes if it is on
the other side of the equation.
I = 0.27 M I = 0.00 M
C = –0.13 M C = 2 × 0.13 M
= 0.26 M
E = 0.14 M E = ?
Step 6 Use the change in concentration
values to calculate any unknown
equilibrium concentrations.
I = 0.27 M I = 0.00 M
C = –0.13 M C = 0.26 M
E = 0.14 M E = I + C
E =
 0.00 M + 0.26 M
E = 0.26 M
Step 7 Substitute values into the
equilibrium constant expression
to solve for K, including units.
K =
[NO2]2
[N2O4] =
= 0.48 M
(0.26 M)2
0.14 M
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
6B THE REACTION QUOTIENT AND EQUILIBRIUM CONSTANT
187
Relationship between Q and K
In this section, we have looked at calculations involving Q and K separately. However, it
is important to note that we can relate the values obtained for these two terms to gain an
understanding of what is happening at any given moment in a reaction. This is based on the
following two aspects.
1 When a system involving a reversible reaction is not at equilibrium, we can only
calculate the reaction quotient, Q.
2 The equilibrium constant for a given equilibrium system at a given temperature does not
change, regardless of whether that system is currently at equilibrium or not.
Let’s think about an example of an equilibrium system, for which we know the equilibrium
constant. The system is not currently at equilibrium, which means that the rates of the
forward and reverse reactions are not equal. Considering this, at this given point in time,
one must be favoured … but which one? As the system is not at equilibrium, we can
calculate the reaction quotient, Q, using provided values for the concentration of the
reactants and products at that moment. Once we have the value for Q, we can compare it to
K and our outcomes would be:
• Q < K – in this instance, the forward reaction is currently being favoured. As the value
of Q is less than K, the reaction needs to produce more products to reach equilibrium.
• Q > K – in this instance, the reverse reaction is currently being favoured. As the value of
Q is more than K, the reaction needs to produce more reactants to reach equilibrium.
A way of remembering this is explored in the following Skills section.
6B SKILLS
Memory tools
In this section, we have discussed how the reaction quotient, Q, relates to the
equilibrium constant, K. One of the important things to learn from this is understanding
that when a reaction is not at equilibrium, the value of Q can be used to determine
which reaction is being favoured.
While the section has explained this from a theory point of view, there are also memory
techniques that you can employ to help you remember. A common one is called ‘follow
the crocodile’, which goes like this:
If Q < K, then the forward reaction is being favoured.
If Q > K, then the reverse reaction is being favoured.
At this point, it probably isn’t apparent why it is called ‘follow the crocodile’. To
understand that, we just have to make some small additions to our < and > signs to
make them look like this:
By turning the sign into a crocodile by adding an eye and teeth, we can see that in this
case, the crocodile is moving to the right. If the opposite sign was used, the crocodile
would be moving to the left. This can be a really handy memory tip to help you
remember this relationship. However, it is important to note that this only works if you
always write Q first!
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
188 CHAPTER 6 EQUILIBRIUM
Section 6B questions
1 X reacts with Y according to the following equation:
X(aq) + 2Y(aq) ⇌ 3XY(aq)
Using this equation, find:
a the expression for K.
b the units for K.
Another equilibrium system involves the reaction to form hydrogen fluoride gas
according to the following equation:
H2(g) + F2(g) ⇌ 2HF(g)
The initial concentrations of hydrogen and fluorine, respectively, were 0.32 M and
0.080 M and the amount of hydrogen fluoride formed was 0.12 M. Given this:
c find the value for K.
d state whether the equilibrium favours the reactants or products and why.
2 The following reaction has an equilibrium constant of 0.200 M.
H2CO3(aq) ⇌ H+(aq) + HCO3
–(aq)
At equilibrium, the mixture contains 0.001 M H2CO3, 0.005 M HCO3
– and an unknown
amount of H+. Find the concentration of H+ in this mixture.
3 Carbonic acid dissociates to form a bicarbonate ion and a hydrogen ion, as in the
equation below. If 1.0 M hydrogen carbonate, 0.8 M hydrogen ions and 0.8 M carbonic
acid are present at equilibrium, determine the value of the equilibrium constant.
H2CO3(aq) ⇌ H+(aq) + HCO3
–(aq)
4 A 1.0 L container holds a mixture of 0.043 mol of H2 gas, 0.062 mol of I2 gas and
0.358 mol of HI gas at equilibrium at 440°C. The reaction is:
H2(g) + I2(g) ⇌ 2HI(g)
Calculate K.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
6C Le ChâTELIER’s PRINCIPLE
189
6C
Le Châtelier’s principle
Study Design:
•
The dynamic nature of homogenous equilibria
involving aqueous solutions or gases and
their representation by balanced chemical or
thermochemical equations (including states) and
by concentration–time graphs
•
The change in position of equilibrium that can occur
when changes in temperature or species or volume
(concentration or pressure) are applied to a system
at equilibrium, and the representation of these
changes using concentration–time graphs
•
Calculations involving equilibrium expressions
(including units) for a closed homogeneous
equilibrium system and the dependence of the
equilibrium constant (K) value on the system
temperature and the equation used to represent
the reaction
•
The application of Le Châtelier’s principle to identify
factors that favour the yield of a chemical reaction
•
Responses to the conflict between optimal rate
and temperature considerations in producing
equilibrium reaction products, with reference to
the green chemistry principles of catalysis and
designing for energy efficiency
Glossary:
Le Châtelier’s principle
ENGAGE
A miner who made a major
finding
Henry Louis Le Châtelier, a French chemist
of the nineteenth century, made one of
the most significant contributions to our
understanding of chemistry through his
work on equilibrium. He actually began
his career as a mining engineer but then
shifted to work as a laboratory chemist after
a few years. His principle on equilibrium
systems, Le Châtelier’s principle, is the focus of this section. After he developed this
theory, he spent a lot of time thinking about how it could be adapted to improve
industrial processes, which led to him suggesting the most appropriate parameters
for the production of ammonia. During the time when he was particularly interested
in industrial chemistry, he also managed to perfect the oxyacetylene torch, which is a
highly effective tool for cutting metals and welding. In this section, you will learn more
about Le Châtelier’s Principle and how it helps predict how changes to equilibrium
systems alter the position of equilibrium. You will also explore how industrial processes
sometimes need to find a balance between the rate of a reaction and the production of
equilibrium reaction products and how green chemistry principles are being used to
overcome these challenges.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
190 CHAPTER 6 EQUILIBRIUM
Le Châtelier’s
principle
If an equilibrium
system is
subjected to
a change, the
system will
adjust itself to
partially oppose
that change
and restore
equilibrium
EXPLAIN
Le Châtelier’s principle
In this section, we will explore what happens to
systems at equilibrium when certain factors are
changed. Our understanding of what happens
in these situations is governed by Le Châtelier’s
principle, which states that:
‘If an equilibrium system is subjected to a
change, the system will adjust itself to partially
oppose that change and restore equilibrium.’
This section of the chapter examines how specific
changes affect equilibrium systems, the value of K
and how we can logically infer the consequences
of these changes.
For each of the changes described in this section,
there are essentially three steps that you need
to follow to understand what effect it will have.
These steps are summarised in the flow chart below.
Figure 6C–1 Henry Louis Le Châtelier
extended our understanding of
equilibrium through his work on the topic,
which is summarised as Le Châtelier’s
principle.
STEP 1:
Identify the
condition that
has changed
STEP 2:
Determine how
that change
can be opposed
STEP 3:
Determine whether
opposing the change
involves favouring the
forward or reverse reaction
Equilibrium
re-established
An important point regarding step 3 is that a number of different phrases can be used to
describe the process that occurs to restore equilibrium. The statements below both describe
the same thing and either would be equally valid to say in a given scenario.
• The forward reaction is favoured OR the position of equilibrium shifts to the right.
• The reverse reaction is favoured OR the position of equilibrium shifts to the left.
Adding reactant or product
For a closed system, adding a reactant or a
product alters the concentration of that given
species and thus, the equilibrium system. If a
reactant is added, then the concentration of
that reactant is higher than it should be, and as
such, the system needs to respond to lower the
concentration of reactants to restore equilibrium,
as the example in Figure 6C–2 shows. For this to
happen, the forward reaction is favoured.
Equally, if product is added to the system, the
concentration of products is higher than it
should be and the system opposes this change by
favouring the reverse reaction.
These effects on equilibrium are summarised in
the example system in Figure 6C–3.
Concentration (M)
N2
O2
NO2
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
N2 added
Time
Figure 6C–2 The effect of adding N2 to the
N2 + 2O2 → 2NO2 equilibrium system
6C Le ChâTELIER’s PRINCIPLE
191
Rate
2
1
N2 + 2O2 → 2NO2
2NO2 → N2 + 2O2
3
Time
4
1 System at equilibrium – forward and
reverse reaction rates are constant,
non-zero and the same.
2 Nitrogen is added, and the rate of the
forward reaction increases dramatically
due to increased number of collisions.
3 As more products are produced, there is a
slight increase in the reverse reaction rate,
again due to more collisions.
4 Forward and reverse rates plateau and
equilibrium is re-established.
Figure 6C–3 The step-by-step effect of adding a reactant to a system
It is important to understand that when there is a change in concentration, which is then
opposed by the equilibrium system, the value of the equilibrium constant remains the same
throughout. In fact, the only change that also results in a changed value for K is a change in
temperature. This is a key feature of K values – they are specific for a given system under
certain conditions.
Temperature, enthalpy and equilibrium
The effect of temperature on an equilibrium reaction depends on whether the reaction
is endothermic or exothermic. Endothermic reactions use heat, whereas exothermic
reactions release heat. Using our NO2 example, we can now describe the reaction fully as
an exothermic reaction. Given that the forward reaction produces heat, we know that the
reverse reaction consumes heat. Therefore, the forward reaction is exothermic, and the
reverse reaction is endothermic.
A simple strategy for understanding the effect of changing the temperature of an
equilibrium system involves writing ‘heat’ as part of the reaction. In an endothermic
reaction, heat is used as part of the reaction process and so would be written on the side of
the reactants. In an exothermic reaction, heat is released as part of the reaction process and
so would be written on the side of the products; that is:
Endothermic: A + B + heat ⇌ C + D
Exothermic: A + B ⇌ C + D + heat
Using this strategy, we can then consider this condition change identically to how we
thought about adding or removing a reactant or product. If we increase the temperature of
an equilibrium system for an endothermic reaction, this increases the ‘heat’, which is on the
reactants side of the equation. From our previous understanding, we can then determine
that the system will oppose this change by favouring the forward reaction. Similarly, if we
were to increase the temperature of an equilibrium system for an exothermic reaction, this
increases the ‘heat’, which is on the products side of the equation. This would result in the
reverse reaction being favoured.
LINK
1C
EXOTHERMIC
AND
ENDOTHERMIC
REACTIONS
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
192 CHAPTER 6 EQUILIBRIUM
Changing the temperature will result in a changed
value of K. Temperature is the only condition that
you need to know about that changes the value
of K for a reaction, and indeed a reaction will
have a range of different K values and equilibrium
positions for a range of different temperatures.
Essentially, if the change in temperature results
in the forward reaction being favoured (that is, a
decreased temperature for an exothermic reaction
or an increased temperature for an endothermic
reaction), then the concentration of products will
increase and so will the value of K. The opposite
is true if the reverse reaction is favoured and the
value of K will decrease. This is summarised in
Table 6C–1 below and Figure 6C–4 on the right.
New equilibrium
New K value
Concentration (M)
N2
O2
NO2
Increase
in temperature
Time
Figure 6C–4 The effect of a temperature
change on the concentrations of different
compounds in an equilibrium system
Table 6C–1 The effect of temperature on K for
endothermic and exothermic reactions
Temperature ΔH K
Endothermic Increase
Increase
Exothermic Decrease
Endothermic Decrease
Decrease
Exothermic Increase
Pressure, volume and equilibrium
As you have learned before, volume and pressure are inversely related – that is, if you
decrease the volume of a reaction vessel containing gases, the pressure will increase
(assuming that the temperature and amount of gas are kept constant). In an equilibrium
system, this will impact on the position of equilibrium, as it is equivalent to changing the
concentration of the molecules in the system (that is, an increased pressure is due to a
higher number of particles per unit of area). As such, based on Le Châtelier’s principle, we
should expect a change in the system to restore the equilibrium position. The rules for this
are as follows.
• If pressure is increased, the equilibrium system will oppose the change by favouring the
reaction that produces the least moles of gas.
• If the pressure is decreased, the equilibrium system will oppose the change by favouring
the reaction that produces the most moles of gas.
For example, when compressed, the reaction between O2 and N2 that produces NO2
experiences a shift away from equilibrium, as seen in Figure 6C–5 on the following page.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
6C Le ChâTELIER’s PRINCIPLE
193
As we can see through this example, there are three moles of
gas on the reactants side of the equation, but only two moles
on the products side. As the pressure was increased when the
reaction volume was decreased, this led to the reaction that
produced the least moles of gas being favoured – the forward
reaction. Unlike temperature, changing the pressure/volume
of a reaction doesn’t change the value of K as the system can
restore the original concentration ratio.
Occasionally, problems will involve the addition of an
inert gas to an equilibrium system. While this will increase
the overall pressure of the container, it does not change
the partial pressures of any of the gases involved in the
equilibrium system (assuming the volume and temperature of
the system are kept constant), as represented in Figure 6C–6.
Therefore, the addition of an inert gas does not change the
position of equilibrium, nor does it change the value
of K.
⇌
N2(g) + 202(g) 2NO2(g)
Equilibrium
re-established
Concentration (M)
N2
O2
NO2
Increase
in pressure
Time
Figure 6C–5 Increasing the pressure of an
equilibrium system results in the reaction
producing the least moles of gas being
favoured.
Gas added
Figure 6C–6 Addition of inert gas (orange) has
no effect as the overall concentrations of both
reacting gases remain the same.
Dilution and equilibrium
Dilution of an aqueous equilibrium system,
achieved through the addition of an
unreactive solvent, also affects the position of
equilibrium by decreasing the concentrations
of the reactants and products. As such, the
system will favour the reaction that produces
more particles. If both sides of the reaction
contain the same number of particles, then
the position of equilibrium will be unchanged
(as illustrated in Figure 6C–7). As with
changes in pressure and volume, dilution
does not change the value of K, just the
equilibrium position.
1.5 M
1.0 M
Concentration (M)
4
3
2
1
0
Reactants
3.0 M
Products
2.0 M
Dilution by
factor of 2
Time
Figure 6C–7 Dilution of an aqueous mixture at equilibrium
has no effect on equilibrium position if both sides of the
equation have the same number of particles.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
194 CHAPTER 6 EQUILIBRIUM
CHAPTER 5
LINK
Catalysts and equilibrium
As you learned in Chapter 5, catalysts alter the rate of reaction by decreasing the activation
energy of a given reaction. What we didn’t learn, however, is that the activation energy is
lowered for both the forward and the reverse reactions. Therefore, the concentrations of
the products and reactants don’t change – just the speed at which they are formed. Thus,
the value of K isn’t changed, nor is the position of the equilibrium. Essentially, we just reach
equilibrium faster if we use a catalyst (Figure 6C–8).
Reaction without catalyst
Reaction with catalyst
Ea (X → Y )
Energy
Ea (Y → X)
Y
∆H
X
Reaction path
Figure 6C–8 The effect of a catalyst on activation energy
Using K to predict changes in equilibrium position
In the examples on the previous pages, we have discussed the rationale from a reaction
perspective to predict the effect of changing concentration and temperature on the position
of equilibrium. However, it is also possible to use the equilibrium constant to predict which
reaction will be favoured to re-establish equilibrium.
Firstly, remember that temperature is the only condition that affects the value of the
equilibrium constant. Therefore, in every other instance where a change is made, the
system must oppose that change in a way that keeps the value of K constant.
Let’s look at this using the formation of ammonia as an example. The equilibrium reaction
that is occurring is:
N2(g) + 3H2(g) ⇌ 2NH3(g)
Therefore, the equilibrium expression for this reaction is:
[NH3]2
K =
[N2][H2]3
Consider an example where equilibrium is disrupted through the addition of more nitrogen
gas. When this happens, we can see that the denominator in our equilibrium expression
will have increased. For K to remain constant, the numerator must also increase to balance
this change. As the numerator is represented by the products in the reaction, for this to
increase, the forward reaction must be favoured. This illustrates that the equilibrium
expression can also be used as a way of predicting shifts in the position of equilibrium due
to changes in reaction conditions.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
6C Le ChâTELIER’s PRINCIPLE
195
Table 6C–2 Summarising the effect of all external variables on an equilibrium system in light of
Le Châtelier’s principle
Condition
change
Le Châtelier’s
response
Reaction
favoured
Position of
equilibrium
Does K
change?
Adding reactant Decrease
concentration of
reactants
Forward reaction Shifts right No
Adding product Decrease
concentration of
products
Reverse reaction Shifts left No
Increasing
temperature
Decrease
temperature
Endothermic
reaction
Depends on system Yes
Decreasing
temperature
Increase temperature Exothermic
reaction
Depends on system Yes
Increasing
pressure
Decrease pressure Reaction that
produces less
particles
Depends on system No
Decreasing
pressure
Increase pressure Reaction that
produces more
particles
Depends on system No
Diluting reaction Increase
concentration
Reaction that
produces more
particles
Depends on system No
Add a catalyst None Neither No change No
Competing factors in equilibrium
In Chapter 5, you looked at how reaction rate can be altered by a range of factors. In this
chapter, you’ve learned how equilibrium will be reached regardless of speed, and that
the equilibrium position is final for a given set of conditions. However, you also learned
that by Le Châtelier’s principle, reaction conditions can be altered to favour the reactants
or products. Thus, to optimise a reaction, both rate and equilibrium effects must be
considered.
For example, we know that higher temperatures result in faster reaction rates. However,
we also know that for exothermic reactions, this will favour the reverse reaction and so
will decrease the yield of products. For this reason, a compromise often needs to be found
between achieving the optimal reaction rate and maximising the yield of a desired product.
We can consider both effects side by side and, for a given reaction, optimise the yield of the
reaction (Table 6C–3).
Table 6C–3 Optimal conditions for high rate and high yield
LINK CHAPTER 5
Improve rate Improve yield
Increase concentration Add excess reactant
Increase temperature Low temperature for exothermic reactions, high
temperature for endothermic reactions
Increase pressure Low or high pressure depending on the number
of reactant/product particles in the system
Add appropriate catalyst Removal of product as it is formed
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
196 CHAPTER 6 EQUILIBRIUM
Figure 6C–9 Reactions being conducted on a laboratory scale or an industrial scale will have
different priorities for factors affecting reaction rate and yield.
Check-in questions – Set 1
1 What is Le Châtelier’s principle and how does it relate to chemical equilibrium?
2 Consider the exothermic reaction, 2NO2(g) ⇌ N2O4(g). If the system is at equilibrium and
the temperature is increased, what will happen to the position of equilibrium and why?
3 Consider a homogeneous equilibrium system involving gaseous reactants and products.
The volume of the container that the reaction is taking place in is halved. Describe the
outcome of this change and explain what it will depend on.
Using graphical and thermochemical information to determine
optimal conditions
It is important to understand how to use a range of different information to determine the
optimal conditions to improve the yield of a chemical process. Three pieces of information
are required to get a complete picture of how to optimise a reaction:
• the thermochemical equation, including the enthalpy
• the value of K so that we can determine where the equilibrium position lies
• a graph of the yield depending on temperature.
With this information, the optimum conditions for a reaction to occur and how these
changes will affect the percentage yield can be determined.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
6C Le ChâTELIER’s PRINCIPLE
197
Yield of ammonia (%)
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
350 °C
400 °C
450 °C
500 °C
550 °C
0 100 200 300 400
Pressure (atmospheres)
Figure 6C–10 Graph of ammonia
yield versus pressure at different
temperatures. Clearly, lower
temperatures favour higher yields.
You can see from the graphical information in Figure 6C–10 that lower temperatures
favour ammonia production. Looking at the thermochemical equation below, can you
think why?
N2(g) + 3H2(g) ⇌ 2NH3(g) ΔH = –92 kJ mol–1
The reaction is exothermic, so high temperatures will favour the reverse reaction. On the
other hand, low temperatures will favour the forward reaction. We can also see that on the
reactants side there are four particles, whereas on the products side there are two particles.
Therefore, increasing the pressure will favour the forward reaction. Adding a catalyst to
achieve the optimal rate of reaction, without altering the position of equilibrium, might
be a good idea. The Haber process to produce ammonia industrially does indeed use high
pressure, a metal catalyst and medium to low temperatures to optimise yield.
Optimising reactions using green chemical principles
While optimising yield and rate is important in ensuring we get the most products formed,
we can, inadvertently, produce an excessive amount of waste products or pollution when
focused solely on these parameters. When the concept of green chemical principles was
introduced, it required a shift in thinking from one of a traditional ‘maximising yield’
mindset to a more modern one of ‘valuing waste elimination and avoiding toxic/hazardous
materials’.
One way to do this is to use catalysts that are non-toxic to optimise the chemical reactions.
Better yet, catalysts that are biodegradable and prefer milder reaction conditions favour
greener outcomes. This has led to the expansion of the area of biocatalysis in recent years,
as enzymes are starting to gain use industrially in place of traditional oxidants, reductants,
acids and bases. Biocatalysts can also be produced sustainably using bacteria.
An example is the pharmaceutical industry, which traditionally produced an excess of waste
materials by up to two orders of magnitude and 103 tonnes of waste per tonne of product.
This industry has shifted more towards green chemical principles recently. The molecule
sertraline, the active ingredient in an antidepressant produced by the pharmaceutical
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
198 CHAPTER 6 EQUILIBRIUM
company Pfizer, is now synthesised in three steps instead of
more than ten. This reduction in the number of steps, which
is made possible by using a more selective catalyst, a more
environmentally friendly solvent and knowledge of equilibrium
to maximise product yield, results in a significant reduction in
the amount of waste products generated from the process. In
this way, the pharmaceutical production of sertraline illustrates
how improving the design efficiency of reaction pathways and
utilising catalysts can significantly reduce the environmental
impact of chemical reactions required for the generation of
consumer products. Figure 6C–11 Sertraline
is commonly used as an
antidepressant.
VIDEO 6C–1
SKILLS: LOGICAL
REASONING
6C SKILLS
Logical reasoning
You will have seen in this section that you will be expected to understand how
a number of factors impact on the position of equilibrium. While this in itself is
challenging enough, it would have also become apparent that the outcome it not always
straightforward. As an example, we can’t simply state how a change in temperature
affects the position of equilibrium – it depends on whether the temperature is increased
or decreased and also whether the reaction is exothermic or endothermic. When you
consider all of this, there are a lot of things to remember!
However, it is important to note that if you understand and remember one thing, it
is often possible to work out the other related situations by logical reasoning alone.
Let’s look at this using the example of changing concentration. In terms of changing
concentration, there are four scenarios that we could be assessing, which are:
1 increasing the concentration of a reactant
2 decreasing the concentration of a reactant
3 increasing the concentration of a product
4 decreasing the concentration of a product
From this list, let’s imagine that we could only remember the affect that change number
1 has – increasing the concentration of a reactant leads to the forward reaction being
favoured. How does this help us solve the rest?
Well, 1 and 2 are the opposite of each other. So if 1 favours the forward reaction, 2 must
favour the reverse reaction.
Similarly, 1 and 3 are also opposites of each other. So if 1 favours the forward reaction,
3 must favour the reverse reaction.
We can use this information to then solve for 4. Changes 3 and 4 are opposites of each
other; so if 3 favours the reverse reaction, 4 must favour the forward reaction.
It can initially seem confusing to set it out as shown above, so you may prefer to
look at it in a more visual fashion by constructing a grid like the one shown on the
following page.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
6C Le ChâTELIER’s PRINCIPLE
199
Increasing [reactant]
Favours forward reaction
Increasing [product]
Decreasing [reactant] Decreasing [product]
By setting the grid up like this, the boxes that are adjacent will always be the opposite
and the one at a diagonal will always be the same. Copy the grid above and try filling it in
to see it working.
Section 6C questions
1 Define ‘Le Châtelier’s principle’.
2 For the reactions below, indicate how the following changes will affect the equilibrium
position:
i adding reactant
ii decreasing the temperature
iii adding a catalyst
iv decreasing the volume of the container
a N2(g) + 3H2(g) ⇌ 2NH3(g) ΔH = –92 kJ mol–1
b Fe(NO3)3(aq) + KNCS(aq) ⇌ FeNCS2+(aq) + KNO3(aq) + 2NO3
–(aq)
 Exothermic reaction
3 Using an example, explain how dilution affects equilibrium position.
4 Draw the concentration–time graph that would be expected for nitrogen reacting with
oxygen to form nitrogen dioxide that has reached equilibrium and is then moved to a
larger container. What happens to the value of K for this reaction?
5 Discuss how rate and equilibrium affect reaction yield.
6 What information is required to assess the yield of a reaction?
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
200
Chapter 6 review
Summary
Create your own set of summary notes for this chapter, on paper or in a digital document. A model
summary is provided in the Teacher Resources and can be used to compare with yours.
Checklist
In the Interactive Textbook, the success criteria are linked from the review questions and will be
automatically ticked when answers are correct. Alternatively, print or photocopy this page and tick
the boxes when you have answered the corresponding questions correctly.
Success criteria – I am now able to: Linked questions
6A.1 6A.2 6B.1 6B.2 6B.3  State the difference between reversible and irreversible reactions  Explain the difference between rate of reaction and extent of reaction 6A.3  Define ‘dynamic equilibrium’  State the expression for the equilibrium constant  Determine the position of equilibrium, based on the value of K  Use the equilibrium expression to calculate the value of K or the
equilibrium concentration of a reactant or product
6B.4  Calculate the reaction quotient, including units, for a given
equilibrium system
6B.5  Determine how the position of equilibrium shifts using values of
Q and K
6C.1  State Le Châtelier’s principle 6C.2  Predict the effect of changes in temperature on the position of
equilibrium using Le Châtelier’s principle
6C.3 6C.4  Determine the effect of temperature on the equilibrium constant  Predict the effect of a change in volume on the position of equilibrium
using Le Châtelier’s principle
6C.5  Predict the effect of adding or removing a reactant or product on the
position of equilibrium using Le Châtelier’s principle
6C.6 6C.7  Sketch a concentration–time graph to represent a given equilibrium system  Interpret concentration–time graphs to determine changes made to
an equilibrium system
6C.8  Determine the factors that maximise yield in a given equilibrium
system using Le Châtelier’s principle
6C.9  Identify potential conflicts between reaction rate and producing
equilibrium reaction products in a given equilibrium system
6C.10 6C.11 6C.12  Describe the green chemistry principle of catalysis  Describe the green chemistry principle of designing for energy efficiency  Explain how the green chemistry principles of catalysis and designing
for energy efficiency can solve conflicts between optimal reaction rate
and producing equilibrium reaction products in equilibrium systems
4☐
11☐
6☐
12☐, 14☐
14☐
5☐, 12☐, 14☐
14☐
1☐, 14☐
7☐
3☐, 12☐
12☐
10☐, 12☐
13☐
12☐
13☐
2☐
8☐, 11☐
9☐
11☐
11☐
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
201
Multiple-choice questions
1 A change is made to a reaction at equilibrium. Just after this change is made, it is found that the
reaction quotient is smaller than the equilibrium constant. At this time, the
A forward reaction is being favoured.
B reverse reaction is being favoured.
C reaction has re-established equilibrium.
D concentration of the products is greater than the concentration of the reactants.
2 Ammonia is produced via the following chemical reaction:
N2(g) + 3H2(g) ⇌ 2NH3(g) ∆H = –92 kJ mol–1
Which of the following changes to the reaction conditions will increase the yield of ammonia?
A increasing the volume
B removing hydrogen gas
C decreasing the pressure
D decreasing the temperature
3 Which of the following combinations of statements regarding the effect of an increase in
temperature on an equilibrium system is true?
Exothermic or endothermic Effect on position of equilibrium
A Exothermic Equilibrium shifts to the right
B Endothermic C Exothermic D Endothermic Forward reaction is favoured
Forward reaction is favoured
Equilibrium shifts to the left
4
Which of the following best describes the difference between reversible and irreversible
chemical reactions?
A Reversible reactions are those that can be undone by adding heat, while irreversible
reactions cannot be undone by any means.
B Reversible reactions can proceed in either direction, while irreversible reactions can only
proceed in one direction.
C Reversible reactions are those that can be reversed by adding a catalyst, while irreversible
reactions cannot be reversed with a catalyst.
D Reversible reactions occur quickly, while irreversible reactions occur slowly.
5 Sulfur dioxide and oxygen react to form sulfur trioxide, which is an important step in the
synthesis of sulfuric acid. The reaction for this is:
2SO2(g) + O2(g) ⇌ 2SO3(g)
At equilibrium, the concentrations of SO2, O2 and SO3 are found to be 0.03 M, 0.16 M and
0.54 M respectively. The value of K is
A 112.5 M–1
B 112.5 M
C 2025 M–1
D 2025 M
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
202
6 Which of the following is statements about a reaction system at dynamic equilibrium is incorrect?
A The reaction is still occurring.
B The concentrations of the reactants and products are constant.
C The rate of the forward reaction is equal to the rate of the reverse reaction.
D The concentration of the products is equal to the concentration of the reactants.
7 According to Le Châtelier’s principle, which of the following statements is true?
A An increase in temperature will result in an increased rate of reaction.
B A change in reaction conditions will result in an increased rate of the forward and reverse
reactions.
C A change in reaction conditions will result in the position of equilibrium shifting to restore
equilibrium.
D The reaction quotient will always be greater than the equilibrium constant directly after a
change is made to the reaction conditions of a dynamic equilibrium.
8 For the production of ammonia according to the reaction shown below, which change in
condition would lead to an increased rate of reaction but decreased yield of ammonia?
N2(g) + 3H2(g) ⇌ 2NH3(g) ∆H = –92 kJ mol–1
A introducing a catalyst
B increasing the pressure
C adding more nitrogen gas
D increasing the temperature
9 Catalysts allow for equilibrium systems to follow green chemistry principles because they
A increase the yield of the desired product.
B allow for the reaction to be conducted at higher pressures.
C allow for the reaction to be conducted at a lower temperature.
D increase the rate of the reaction and increase the value of the equilibrium constant.
10 A dynamic equilibrium has been established for the following chemical reaction:
Fe(NO3)3(aq) + KSCN(aq) ⇌ FeSCN2+(aq) + KNO3(aq) + 2NO3
–(aq)
A 150 mL aliquot of water is added to a 50 mL solution of this reaction. What best describes
what happens to the position of equilibrium for the reaction above?
A The position of equilibrium will not shift.
B The position of equilibrium will shift to the left.
C The position of equilibrium will shift to the right.
D The rate of the reaction will decrease due to a lower collision frequency.
Short-answer questions
11 Samantha is a chemical engineer working for a large ammonia production company. The
company uses the Haber–Bosch process, a crucial industrial method for nitrogen fixation, to
convert nitrogen (N2) and hydrogen (H2) into ammonia (NH3), as shown below.
N2(g) + 3H2(g) ⇌ 2NH3(g)
She has been assigned the task of optimising the conditions for the Haber–Bosch process to
minimise cost and maximise output.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
203
a Describe the difference between the rate of reaction and extent of reaction. (1 mark)
b For the equilibrium system described on the previous page, identify a reaction
condition that would lead to an optimal rate of reaction but not produce the
greatest amount of reaction products and explain why this is the case. (3 marks)
c Describe how two green energy principles are being used to overcome these issues in
equilibrium systems. (4 marks)
12 A group of students has conducted experiments to investigate the equilibrium mixture
given below:
2NO2(g) ⇌ N2O4(g) ΔH = –57 kJ mol–1
brown colourless
a An equilibrium mixture is prepared when a quantity of nitrogen dioxide is added to a
large test tube and sealed securely. At t1, the temperature of the equilibrium mixture at
25°C is increased to 100°C. Equilibrium is re-established at t2. Copy and complete the
concentration–time graph below to show the concentration of both species between
t1 and t3. (2 marks)
0.60
0.50
0.40
Concentration (M)
NO2
0.30
N2O4
0.20
0.10
0.00
t1 t2 t3
Time
b Write an expression for the equilibrium constant, K, for the reaction:
2NO2(g) ⇌ N2O4(g) (1 mark)
c i Use data from the graph to determine the magnitude of K at 25°C for:
2NO2(g) ⇌ N2O4(g) (2 marks)
ii Determine the value of K at 25°C for the reaction:
N2O4(g) ⇌ 2NO2(g)
Include units with your answer. (1 mark)
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
204
d The temperature of a system at 25°C is increased to 100°C. Choose from the options lower/
no change/higher to indicate how the following would be affected. (5 marks)
i the magnitude of the equilibrium constant, K
ii the intensity of the brown colour of the mixture
iii the rate of the reverse reaction
iv the total mass of the two gases
v the total number of gas molecules in the test tube
13 Another group of students conduct a different experiment, which is shown by the
following reaction:
Co2+(aq) + 4Cl–(aq) ⇌ CoCl4
2–(aq) ΔH > 0
pink blue
Shown below is a concentration–time graph for this equilibrium system. The graph shows the
effect of a dilution at time t2.
CI–
Concentration (M)
CoCI42–
Co2+
0 t1 t3
t4
t2 t5
Time
a During what time period(s) was the system at equilibrium? b What colour change would have been observed with the dilution at t2? (1 mark)
(1 mark)
c Choose from the options lower/the same/higher to complete the following questions.
Compared to the value at t1, at t4 the (3 marks)
i value of K will be _________.
ii concentration of Co2+(aq) will be _________.
iii concentration of CoCl4
2–(aq) will be _________.
d At t5, CoCl4
2– is added to the equilibrium mixture. Copy the graph and sketch the change
that you would expect to see (assume that equilibrium is established again by t6).
Explain, using Le Châtelier’s principle, what would happen to the position of
equilibrium and the colour of the equilibrium mixture. (3 marks)
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
205
14 Iron(III) ions react with thiocyanate to form iron(III) thiocyanate, according to the equation:
Fe3+(aq) + SCN–(aq) ⇌ FeSCN2+(aq)
a What is the equilibrium expression for this reaction? (1 mark)
b The equilibrium constant for the above reaction is 7.89 × 102 at 25°C. If the equilibrium
concentrations of Fe3+ and SCN– are 0.005 M and 0.01 M, respectively, what is the
concentration of FeSCN2+ at equilibrium? (2 marks)
c The value of the equilibrium constant for this reaction is relatively large. What
does this tell us about the extent of the reaction? (2 marks)
d If at a certain point in time during the reaction, the concentrations of Fe3+, SCN–
,
and FeSCN2+ are 0.002 M, 0.015 M and 0.01 M, respectively, what is the reaction
quotient (Q) for the reaction? (1 mark)
e Based on the values of K and Q, what is the direction of the reaction at this point
and why? (2 marks)
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
206
UNIT
3
HOW CAN DESIGN AND INNOVATION HELP TO
OPTIMISE CHEMICAL PROCESSES?
CHAPTER
7
ELECTROLYTIC CELLS
Introduction
The use of electrolytic cells is one of the most important commercial
chemical processes. It allows for the production of a range of highly pure
chemicals. Two of the most used metallic elements, copper and aluminium,
involve refining methods that use electrolysis. Electroplating is another example of
electrolysis, used to apply a coating of metal on objects to make them more resistant
to corrosion or to simply enhance their exterior appearance. Olympic gold medals
are just one example of this type of application. In this chapter, you will learn about
the features of electrolytic cells and make comparisons to galvanic cells. You will
discover the chemistry behind some of the commercial applications of electrolysis
and perform calculations that make connections between the quantity of electric
charge and the quantity of chemicals produced by electrolysis.
Curriculum
Area of Study 1 Outcome 2
How can the rate and yield of chemical reactions be optimised?
Study Design: Learning intentions – at the end of the chapter
I will be able to:
INTRODUCTION
VIDEO
ELECTROLYTIC
CELLS
• The common design features and
general operating principles of
rechargeable (secondary) cells,
with reference to discharging as
a galvanic cell and recharging
as an electrolytic cell, including
the conditions required for the
cell reactions to be reversed and
the electrode polarities in each
mode (details of specific cells
not required)
7A Features of electrolytic cells
7A.1  Explain the importance of the key design features
of electrolytic cells
7A.2  Identify, name, draw and label features of
electrolytic cells, including polarity of electrodes
and the direction of electron flow
7A.3  Identify key similarities and differences between
the design features of galvanic and electrolytic cells
7A.4
 Understand the energy transfers involved in
discharging and recharging of electrolytic cells
7A.5  Identify key features of secondary cells that allow
them to be recharged
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
Study Design: •
The use and limitations of
the electrochemical series to
explain or predict the products
of the electrolysis of particular
chemicals, given their state
(molten liquid or in aqueous
solution) and the electrode
materials used, including the
writing of balanced equations
(with states) for the reactions
occurring at the anode and
cathode and the overall redox
reaction for the cell
•
•
The common design features
and general operating principles
of commercial electrolytic cells
(including, where practicable,
the removal of products as
they form), and the selection of
suitable electrode materials, the
electrolyte (including its state)
and any chemical additives that
result in a desired electrolysis
product (details of specific cells
not required)
The role of innovation in
designing cells to meet society’s
energy needs in terms of
producing ‘green’ hydrogen
(including equations in acidic
conditions) using the following
methods:
– polymer electrolyte membrane
electrolysis powered by either
photovoltaic (solar) or wind
energy
– artificial photosynthesis using
a water oxidation and proton
reduction catalyst system
207
Learning intentions – at the end of the chapter
I will be able to:
7B 7B.1
7B.2 7B.3 7B.4 7B.5 Predicting the products of electrolysis
 Predict and compare the products of electrolysis
when using molten and aqueous electrolytes
 Predict and compare the products of electrolysis
when using different electrodes, including
inert electrodes
 Predict and compare the products of electrolysis
using the electrochemical series, including
situations where there is competition at
the electrodes
 Understand the effect of electrolyte concentration
on the products at the electrodes
 Write balanced half-equations and balanced
overall equations for specific electrolytic cells
7C Commercial electrolytic cells
7C.1  Identify key design features of commercial
electrolytic cells that make them suitable to
produce specific chemicals
7C.2  Explain how the selection of both the electrolyte
and the type of electrodes used will influence
the products generated by commercial
electrolytic cells
7C.3  Describe ways that cells can be designed to
enhance energy efficiency
7C.4  Describe ways that green chemistry
principles can be applied to make the use of
electrochemical cells more sustainable and
environmentally friendly
7C.5  Describe how the electrolysis of water and
artificial photosynthesis can be adapted to
produce ‘green’ hydrogen
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
208
Study Design: Learning intentions – at the end of the chapter
I will be able to:
•
The application of Faraday’s laws
and stoichiometry to determine
the quantity of electrolytic
reactant and product, and the
current or time required to either
use a particular quantity of
reactant or produce a particular
quantity of product
7D Faraday’s laws of electrolysis
7D.1  Understand the stoichiometric relationship
between the quantity of metal and electrons
represented by half-equations in the
electrochemical series
7D.2
 Apply Faraday’s laws to calculate the quantity
of product, current or time required for an
electrolytic cell
VCE Chemistry Study Design extracts © VCAA; reproduced by permission.
Glossary
Discharge cycle
Electrolysis
Electrolytic cell
Electroplating
Green hydrogen
Inert
Molten electrolyte
Non-spontaneous redox reaction
Recharge cycle
Secondary cell
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
CONCEPT MAP
209
Concept map
7A Features of electrolytic cells
Features of these cells as secondary cells
+
Electrons travel
through metallic
conductors in circuit
–
e–
Anode
+
– Cathode
M+
Positive ions move
towards the negative
electrode
X–
Negative ions move towards
the positive electrode Electrolyte
7B Predicting the products of electrolysis Effects of the choice of components
and conditions
– +
7C Commercial electrolytic cells
Design and innovation in commercial
electrolytic cells with a focus
on sustainability
PEM electrolysis
– +
Platinum
electrodes
H+
Electrolyte
contains
Cu2+ ions
Ni2+ ions
Mg2+ ions
H2
Cathode
O2
H2O
Anode
Membrane
7D Faraday’s laws of electrolysis
Calculations using these laws and stoichiometry
Four key steps to solving Faraday’s laws of electrolysis questions
m
1 Determine number of moles of metal (using n =
M ).
2 Determine number of moles of electrons (using the relevant half-equation).
3 Determine the charge, Q, using Q = n(e–) × F.
4 Determine current (amps) or time (seconds), using Q = It.
See the Interactive Textbook for an interactive version of this concept map
interlinked with all concept maps for the course.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
210 CHAPTER 7 ELECTROLYTIC CELLS
7A
Features of electrolytic cells
Study Design:
•
The common design features and
general operating principles of
rechargeable (secondary) cells, with
reference to discharging as a galvanic
cell and recharging as an electrolytic
cell, including the conditions required
for the cell reactions to be reversed and
the electrode polarities in each mode
(details of specific cells not required)
Glossary:
Discharge cycle
Electrolysis
Electrolytic cell
Non-spontaneous redox reaction
Recharge cycle
Secondary cell
ENGAGE
Cell-ebrating batteries!
Have you ever forgotten to recharge the battery in your laptop, your tablet or your
mobile phone? If so, you will know how annoying it can be when these devices run out
of power! As the world shifts to a more mobile society, centred around having access to
these essential devices for our day-to-day lives, it is important to recognise what features
of rechargeable batteries make them so convenient and understand how they differ from
single-use batteries.
There are many types of rechargeable batteries that combine different electrodes and
electrolytes, including, among others, the lithium–ion (Li–ion), nickel–cadmium
(Ni–Cd) and lead–acid batteries. This section will help you discover more about the
important design aspects of such batteries.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
7A FEATuRES OF ELECTROLYTIC CELLS
211
EXPLAIN
Electrolytic cells
Electrolytic cells are examples of electrochemical cells, which use electrical energy provided
by an external power supply (for example, a battery) to force non-spontaneous redox reactions
that would not normally occur to take place. This process is called electrolysis and involves
the conversion of electrical energy into chemical energy. In a simplistic way, this can be
thought of as the opposite of what occurs in galvanic cells, which involve spontaneous
redox reactions that convert chemical energy into electrical energy.
Electron
flow
Battery + –
Power source
Anode (+)
oxidation
Cathode (–)
reduction
– –
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
+ +
+
+
+
+
+ +
+
+
Aqueous solution
or molten salt
Electrolytic cell
a system in
which electrical
energy is
converted to
chemical energy
Non-
spontaneous
redox reaction
a reaction that
transforms
electrical energy
into chemical
potential energy
and has a
negative cell
potential (i.e.
E < 0)
Electrolysis
the process of
forcing a redox
reaction to occur
by passing an
electric current
through an
electrolyte
Figure 7A–1 Electrolysis involves a power source forcing electrons
through the cell, resulting in reduction occurring at the cathode and
oxidation occurring at the anode simultaneously. Cations and anions
migrate from the electrolyte to the cathode and anode, respectively.
Features of electrolytic cells
Electrolytic cells, like galvanic cells, must contain two electrodes and an electrolyte. Energy
from an external power source is required to drive the reactions. An oxidation reaction
occurs at the anode at the same time that a reduction reaction occurs at the cathode.
However, because the reactions are non-spontaneous, the reactants do not need to be
separated in electrolytic cells and can be placed together into the same container. Although
the reactants will not react spontaneously, one important design aspect of electrolytic
cells is to ensure the separation of products to prevent them from prematurely reacting
spontaneously.
Electrolysis
Through the internal circuit (the electrolyte), the current is carried by ions. In general,
anions migrate to the anode and cations migrate to the cathode.
As electrolysis requires energy to force non-spontaneous reactions to take place, a potential
greater than the cell potential for the spontaneous redox reaction must be supplied.
Free-moving ions must be present in the electrolyte, which means that the electrolyte may
be an aqueous solution, or it may be a molten salt consisting of mobile ions. Just like in
galvanic cells, the strongest reducing agent present at the anode will undergo oxidation and
the strongest oxidising agent present at the cathode will undergo reduction.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
212 CHAPTER 7 ELECTROLYTIC CELLS
3C FEATURES OF
GALVANIC CELLS
LINK
Comparing galvanic cells with electrolytic cells
It is useful to remember that reduction always occurs at the cathode, regardless of the
type of electrochemical cell. You should recall the mnemonic used for galvanic cells, the
Happy Red Cat, to help identify the polarity and reactions occurring at each electrode.
In electrolysis, there is an input of electrical energy, which changes the polarity of the
electrode, but not the fact that reduction still occurs at the cathode. For our mnemonic, this
means the cathode is still the site of reduction, however it will now have a negative polarity.
So rather than happy, for electrolytic cells we have a Sad Red Cat. This is an important
difference between galvanic and electrolytic cells. A further summary and comparison of
galvanic cells and electrolytic cells is provided in Table 7A–1.
Table 7A–1 A comparison of galvanic and electrolytic cells
Galvanic cell Electrolytic cell
Requires two half-cells to separate the
reactants
Only one container is required, but products
must be separated.
Spontaneous reactions Non-spontaneous reactions
Chemical energy is converted into electrical
energy.
Electrical energy is converted into chemical
energy.
The polarity of electrodes is determined by
the reactions occurring in the cell.
The polarity of electrodes is determined by
the external power source.
Cathode is positive Cathode is negative
Anode is negative Anode is positive
Reduction occurs at the cathode. Reduction occurs at the cathode.
Oxidation occurs at the anode. Oxidation occurs at the anode.
The strongest reducing agent undergoes
oxidation and the strongest oxidising agent
undergoes reduction.
The strongest reducing agent present at the
anode undergoes oxidation and the strongest
oxidising agent present at the cathode
undergoes reduction.
Electrons flow through the external circuit
from the anode to the cathode.
Electrons flow through the external circuit
from the anode to the cathode.
From the salt bridge, anions migrate to the
anode, cations migrate to the cathode.
From the electrolyte, anions migrate to the
anode, cations migrate to the cathode.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
7A FEATuRES OF ELECTROLYTIC CELLS
213
General features of electrolytic cells
In electrolysis the reactions are non-spontaneous, which means that there must be energy
from an external power source used to drive the reactions. Provided sufficient voltage
is applied, electrons will be pushed from the negative terminal of the battery or power
source towards the cathode, giving it a negative charge. Cations in the electrolyte will be
attracted to the cathode, where reduction will occur. At the positive anode, anions from the
electrolyte will be attracted and undergo oxidation on the surface of the electrode.
Electrons travel
through metallic
conductors in circuit
Power
source
+
–
e–
Anode
+
– Cathode
M+
Positive ions move
towards the negative
electrode
X–
Negative ions move towards
the positive electrode Electrolyte
Figure 7A–2 Key components and movement of charged particles within
an electrolytic cell
Check-in questions – Set 1
1 Copy the diagram of the electrolytic cell below and label the missing features, A–G. Include:
• direction of electron flow
• name of each electrode (anode or cathode)
• polarity of each electrode
• movement of anions and cations in the electrolyte.
+ –
B:
A: E:
F:
C:
G:
D:
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
214 CHAPTER 7 ELECTROLYTIC CELLS
LINK CHAPTER 3
Secondary cell
a type of
electrochemical
cell that can
undergo charge
and discharge
cycles; therefore,
it can be
recharged and
reused
Discharge cycle
when
spontaneous
chemical
reactions occur
converting
chemical energy
into electrical
energy
Recharge cycle
when electrical
energy is used
to force a non-
spontaneous
redox reaction
that converts
electrical energy
into chemical
energy
Secondary cells
You should recall from Chapter 3 that primary cells include non-rechargeable batteries
that spontaneously convert chemical energy into electrical energy. Secondary cells include
rechargeable batteries that can undergo both a discharge cycle and recharge cycle, allowing
them to be reused many times. The discharge process is exactly like that which occurs
in a galvanic or primary cell. However, a secondary cell can be connected to a source of
electrical energy that is used to force non-spontaneous reactions, converting the products
of the discharge cycle back into the initial reactants again. Some examples of secondary
cells include the lead–acid (car) battery, the lithium–ion battery and the nickel–cadmium
battery.
Discharge process
e–
Recharge process
–
e
Electrolyte
Anions
Electrolyte
Cations Cations Anions
Cathode
(+)
Separator
Anode
(–)
Cathode
(–)
Separator
Figure 7A–3 The discharge and recharge processes of secondary cells
Anode
(+)
Recharging a secondary cell
When a secondary cell is discharging, it behaves just like a galvanic cell. However,
recharging a secondary cell involves electrical energy being converted into chemical
energy. This means the cell is behaving like an electrolytic cell. During recharge, the redox
reactions that were occurring during discharge typically get reversed and the polarities of
the electrodes swap. During discharge, the cathode is positive and the anode is negative.
However, during recharge, the cathode is negative and the anode is positive. Although
these polarities change when the reactions are reversed, reduction still always occurs at the
cathode and oxidation at the anode.
One of the conditions necessary for recharging to be possible is that the products of the
discharge reactions must remain in contact with the electrodes. This is essential, as it
means that they will then be present on the electrode for the reverse reaction to occur
when discharging resumes. For this to happen, the products are often solids that adhere
to the electrodes. Furthermore, to recharge successfully, the amount of electrical energy
put into the system must be greater than the potential difference of the cell. For example,
the nickel–cadmium battery is a rechargeable battery that has a cell potential of 1.2 volts.
Therefore, to recharge this battery, a voltage greater than 1.2 volts must be applied.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
7A FEATuRES OF ELECTROLYTIC CELLS
215
Worked example 7A–1: Recharging a secondary cell
VIDEO
WORKED
EXAMPLE 7A–1
A zinc–cerium cell is a rechargeable secondary cell. It contains a membrane that
separates the zinc anode from the carbon cathode, and the electrolyte is an acidic
solution containing a mixture of cerium ions, Ce3+ and Ce4+, and zinc ions, Zn2+
.
The half-equations occurring during discharge in the cell can be simplified as:
Anode: Zn(s) → Zn2+(aq) + 2e–
Cathode: Ce4+(aq) + e–
→ Ce3+(aq)
a Write the overall balanced reaction for the discharge cycle.
b If the standard electrode potential (E° value) for the cerium half-reaction shown is
1.65 V, calculate the voltage required to recharge the cell.
c Write the equation for the reaction occurring at the negative electrode during
recharging.
Solution
Logic Process
Step 1 The discharge cycle occurs
spontaneously according to
the half-equations provided.
Before adding the half-
equations together, they
must be balanced so that the
number of electrons in each
half-equation is equal. This
can be done by multiplying the
second half-equation by two.
Zn(s) → Zn2+(aq) + 2e–
2 × (Ce4+(aq) + e–
= 2Ce4+(aq) + 2e–
→ Ce3+(aq))
→ 2Ce3+(aq)
Step 2 Now that the number of
electrons shown in each half-
equation is the same, combine
half-equations together
(electrons cancel on each
side).
a 2Ce4+(aq) + Zn(s) → 2Ce3+(aq) + Zn2+(aq)
Step 3 By referring to the
electrochemical series in
the appendix of this book,
find the E ° value for the zinc
half-reaction.
Use this to calculate the cell
potential.
b
E
° = –0.76
Cell potential
= E ° (oxidation) – E ° (reduction)
= 1.65 – (–0.76)
= 2.61 V.
To recharge the cell, a voltage of more than
2.61 V is required.
Step 4 The positive electrode during
discharge is the cathode,
but during recharge (during
electrolysis) the polarities
swap, so the positive electrode
will be the anode.
c The recharge reaction will be the reverse of
the discharge reaction, hence:
Zn2+(aq) + 2e–
→ Zn(s)
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
216 CHAPTER 7 ELECTROLYTIC CELLS
7A SKILLS
Identifying differences – need two to tango!
When writing answers to ‘compare and contrast’ questions, it’s important to thoroughly
describe the characteristics that distinguish each of the two items being compared.
Simply outlining the attributes of one item won’t provide a complete answer, as it
doesn’t establish a comparison between the two. The aim of these questions is to
highlight both similarities and differences between two or more subjects. Therefore,
effective responses should pinpoint a feature, describe how it functions or is manifested
in one item and then describe how it functions or is manifested differently in the
other item. This way, you not only point out the differences, but also clarify how these
differences affect the nature or behaviour of the items in question.
For instance, consider the question: ‘What are the differences between galvanic cells and
electrolytic cells?’ An incomplete answer might just say, ‘Galvanic cells are spontaneous
and convert chemical energy to electrical energy.’ While this is accurate, it doesn’t
address how these attributes contrast with those of electrolytic cells. A better, more
complete answer would be:
‘Galvanic cells and electrolytic cells differ primarily in their spontaneity and energy
conversion. Galvanic cells undergo spontaneous redox reactions and function to convert
chemical energy to electrical energy. They operate by driving an electric current through
an external circuit from the anode to the cathode. On the other hand, electrolytic
cells require an external power source to drive non-spontaneous redox reactions, thus
converting electrical energy into chemical energy. Their electric current is driven
through the cell from the cathode to the anode.’
This response distinctly describes both galvanic and electrolytic cells, emphasising their
contrasting features.
Section 7A questions
1 State whether the following statements are true or false for electrolytic cells, and justify
your response.
a Electrons flow from the anode to the cathode.
b Oxidation occurs at the cathode.
c Electrical energy is converted to chemical energy.
d The polarity of the anode is negative.
e The cathode can show an increase in mass during a reaction.
2 State two similarities and two differences between galvanic cells and electrolytic cells.
3 Draw a fully labelled electrolytic cell.
4 What is the difference between a spontaneous redox reaction and a non-spontaneous
redox reaction?
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
7B PREDICTING THE PRODuCTS OF ELECTROLYSIS
217
7B
Predicting the products of electrolysis
Study Design:
•
The use and limitations of the electrochemical series
to explain or predict the products of the electrolysis of
particular chemicals, given their state (molten liquid or
in aqueous solution) and the electrode materials used,
including the writing of balanced equations (with states)
for the reactions occurring at the anode and cathode and
the overall redox reaction for the cell
Glossary:
Inert
Molten electrolyte
ENGAGE
Pipe dreams: fuelling progress ahead!
Extensive pipeline networks are now used around the world to transport water, oil, gas
and other compounds between cities, countries and sometimes even continents. These
pipelines have a huge impact on the economy of countries, as their ability to efficiently
import and export natural resources is critical. However, these pipelines are not perfect
and can often be plagued by issues, including corrosion of the metal pipes. The global
cost of corrosion was estimated to be almost US$3 trillion in 2018! Therefore, finding
the best solutions to avoid corrosion has become a significant area of research. One
method that has been successfully applied in many locations is through the use of an
electric current, which works by ensuring that the metal in the pipe acts as the cathode
and so cannot undergo oxidation. In this section, you are going to learn about how we
can use experimental data to predict electrolysis reactions.
EXPLAIN
Using the electrochemical series to predict which reactions will occur
The ability to predict which reactions are going to occur in an electrolytic cell is similar in
many ways to the way we predict reactions in galvanic cells. In an electrolytic cell, two of
the more important factors to consider are:
• the state of the electrolyte
• the material used for the electrodes.
It is convenient that regardless of whether we are dealing with a galvanic or electrolytic cell,
the strongest oxidising agent present at the cathode will always undergo reduction and that
the strongest reducing agent present at the anode will always undergo oxidation. Knowing
this fact makes it possible to then predict which reactions are occurring within a particular
electrolytic cell.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
218 CHAPTER 7 ELECTROLYTIC CELLS
Molten
electrolyte
a chemical
substance made
from a hot
liquified salt
heated to over
100°C Electrolytes
Some electrolytic cells will contain species in aqueous solutions, meaning that they also
contain liquid water, H2O(l). Liquid water is listed multiple times on the electrochemical
series and given that it can undergo both reduction and oxidation reactions, it is important
to include it when considering the reactions that may take place. Other electrochemical
cells may contain molten electrolytes, which are usually salts that get heated to temperatures
above their melting point. The temperatures of these molten electrolytes are much higher
than 100°C, meaning that no liquid water would be present, and so it can be excluded from
being a potential reactant.
NOTE
It is important to remember to write any redox equations with liquid states (l) for ions and
metals whenever a molten electrolyte is being used. This is different to how they appear on the
electrochemical series, where they are written with standard state symbols, so be careful when
copying across equations under such circumstances. Note that gases (g) will remain the same.
Inert
largely
non-reactive;
does not take
part in a reaction
Electrodes
The type of electrodes used must always be considered when predicting the reactions of
electrolytic cells. Often electrodes are made from species that can take part in a reaction,
for example, solid copper or zinc electrodes. Where this is the case, these species must
always be considered when predicting reactions. However, sometimes non-reactive or inert
materials, such as platinum or carbon, are used for electrodes in cells. Only species present
in the electrolyte itself should be considered when predicting the reactions occurring in
electrolytic cells containing inert electrodes.
Competition at the electrodes
Electrolytic cells can have several chemical species that have the potential to react at each
electrode, so it is vital to make sure you consider all of those present when predicting the
reactions that will take place. Knowing that oxidation will always occur at the anode and
reduction will always occur at the cathode, we can predict the electrode half-reactions that
will occur for a given electrolytic cell at standard conditions.
NOTE
Some species appear more than once on the electrochemical series on both the left-hand and
right-hand sides of the series. Liquid water is a good example of this. When predicting reactions,
all relevant occurrences of each species must be considered to accurately identify the strongest
reducing agent and strongest oxidising agent.
3D USING THE
ELECTROCHEMICAL
SERIES
LINK
Predicting the products of electrolysis
The electrochemical series (in the appendix, on page 542) can be used to help predict which
reactions are most likely to take place at the anode and cathode of an electrolytic cell.
The steps used to identify and predict the reactions occurring in an electrolytic cell are as
follows:
1 Identify all the species present at each electrode. The list may be different for the anode
and the cathode, depending on the material that the electrode is composed of and
whether the cell has different, separated electrolyte sections. Be sure to look carefully at
states and ionic charges. Be sure to include the electrodes if they are made of a reactive
material. Be sure to include or exclude liquid water, depending on the type of electrolyte
present in the cell.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
7B PREDICTING THE PRODuCTS OF ELECTROLYSIS
219
2 Use the electrochemical series and highlight each of the locations where any species
present appear.
3 For the cathode, identify the strongest oxidising agent, which will be reduced. The
reduction half-equation can now be written, as it appears in the electrochemical series.
4 For the anode, identify the strongest reducing agent, which will be oxidised. The half-
equation can now be written but must be reversed from the way that it appears in the
electrochemical series to make it the oxidation half-equation.
5 Write the overall redox equation, if required, by balancing the number of electrons in
each half-equation.
6 Sometimes you may have polyatomic anions present, such as sulfate ions, SO4
2–, or
nitrate ions, NO3
–. These, along with any other polyatomic anions, do not take part in
the redox reactions studied as part of this course, so even though they may be present,
they can be excluded from the list of species that have the potential to react.
VIDEO
WORKED
EXAMPLE 7B–1
Worked example 7B–1: Comparing the products of electrolysis at each electrode
An aqueous solution of copper(II) ions is blue in colour. Compare the products of electrolysis of a 1 M
copper sulfate aqueous solution using copper electrodes with those produced using inert platinum
electrodes. Write the overall redox equation for each electrolytic cell and describe any qualitative
observations you might expect to see while the cells are operating.
Solution
Logic Process
Step 1 List all species present that could
react at the cathode and anode.
Remember that the platinum
electrodes are inert.
For the copper electrodes:
at the cathode: H2O(l), Cu(s), Cu2+(aq)
at the anode: H2O(l), Cu(s), Cu2+(aq)
For the platinum electrode:
at the cathode: H2O(l), Cu2+(aq)
at the anode: H2O(l), Cu2+(aq)
Step 2 Refer to the electrochemical series
and identify the strongest oxidising
agent (highest species on the
left-hand side of the reaction arrow).
For both electrodes:
Cu2+(aq) will undergo reduction at the cathode.
Cu2+(aq) + 2e–
→ Cu(s)
Step 3 Refer to the electrochemical series
and identify the strongest reducing
agent (lowest species on the
right-hand side of the reaction
arrow).
For the copper electrodes:
Cu(s), which will undergo oxidation at the anode.
Use the electrochemical series to identify the half-equation.
Cu(s) → Cu2+(aq) + 2e–
For the platinum electrodes:
H2O(l) will undergo oxidation at the anode. In this example,
water is the only species that is on the right-hand side,
therefore the only species that can be oxidised. Use the
electrochemical series to identify the half-equation.
2H2O(l) → O2(g) + 4H+(aq) + 4e–
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
220 CHAPTER 7 ELECTROLYTIC CELLS
Step 4 Use the half-equations to predict the
products at each electrode.
For the copper electrodes:
Solid copper will be produced at the cathode
and copper ions, Cu2+, will be produced at the anode.
For the platinum electrodes:
Solid copper will still be produced at the cathode; however,
instead of copper ions, oxygen gas and hydrogen ions, H+
,
will be produced at the anode.
Step 5 Combine the half-equations to
give the full overall redox equation,
ensuring electrons are equal in each
half-equation before cancelling and
adding the half-equations together.
For the copper electrodes:
Cu2+(aq) + 2e–
→ Cu(s)
Cu(s) → Cu2+(aq) + 2e–
___________________________________________________
Cu(s) + Cu2+(aq) + 2e–
→ Cu(s) + Cu2+(aq) + 2e–
Cu(s) + Cu2+(aq) → Cu(s) + Cu2+(aq)
For the platinum electrodes:
2 × (Cu2+(aq) + 2e–
→ Cu(s))
___________________________________________________
2Cu2+(aq) + 4e–
→ 2Cu(s)
2H2O(l) → O2(g) + 4H+(aq) + 4e–
___________________________________________________
2H2O(l) + Cu2+(aq) + 4e–
→ 2Cu(s) + O2(g) + 4H+(aq) + 4e–
2H2O(l) + Cu2+(aq) → 2Cu(s) + O2(g) + 4H+(aq)
Step 6 Write your qualitative observations. In the copper electrode system, there would be an increase
in mass at the cathode and a decrease in mass at the anode.
In the platinum electrode system, oxygen would be seen as
bubbles of gas forming; however, it is also important to note
that the production of hydrogen ions would decrease the
pH of the electrolyte solution. The cathode in both systems
would also end up with a coating of copper, and as the
copper ions, Cu2+(aq), are consumed in the reaction, the
electrolyte solution would show a decrease in the intensity of
the blue colour associated with these ions.
NOTE
Even though the electrochemical series lists the reactions as reversible reactions using
equilibrium arrows, remember to always use a solid forward arrow to represent each
half-equation occurring.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
7B PREDICTING THE PRODuCTS OF ELECTROLYSIS
221
Check-in questions – Set 1
1 The electrolytic cell shown
contains copper and zinc
electrodes in a 1 M aqueous
copper(II) sulfate solution.
a Copy and complete the
diagram by labelling the
direction of electron flow, the
anode and cathode, and the
polarity of each electrode.
b Write the half-reaction
(reduction or oxidation)
occurring at each electrode.
c State one observation
that is likely while the cell
is operating.
Positive
+
–
Polarity
Negative
Polarity
Electrons
Cu
electrode
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
+
–
+
–
+
–
+
Electrolysis
+
+
+
+ + +
Zn
electrode
–
Anion
+
Cation
Electrolytic
solution
Non-standard conditions
Although the electrochemical series is useful in predicting redox reactions, one limitation is
that it is only valid for use at standard conditions (1 M, 25°C and 100 kPa).
Despite its convenience as a tool to predict the redox reactions taking place in a cell,
because cells rarely operate under standard conditions, it is only through experiments that
we can be certain about which reactions will proceed. There are several factors that will
affect electrolytic reactions, including:
• the concentration of the electrolyte
• gas pressures
• temperature
• current
• voltage
• the nature of the electrodes.
The effect of electrolyte concentration
When a standard solution of sodium chloride is electrolysed, there are two species present
that can be oxidised at the anode: chloride ions, Cl–(aq), and water, H2O(l). By referring to
the electrochemical series, the two half-equations, together with their electrode potential
values, are:
2Cl–(aq) → Cl2(g) + 2e–
E° = –1.36 V
2H2O(l)
→ O2(g) + 4H+(aq) + 4e–
E° = –1.23 V
The strongest reducing agent is water, H2O, since it is listed higher on the right-hand side.
As such, we would predict that water will undergo oxidation at the anode, as follows:
2H2O(l) → O2(g) + 4H+(aq) + 4e–
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
222 CHAPTER 7 ELECTROLYTIC CELLS
This prediction would generally hold true, especially for low concentrations of sodium
chloride solution, meaning that oxygen gas is the major product at the anode.
However, one limitation of using the electrochemical series to predict reactions is that it
is based on solution concentrations of 1 M. As the standard electrode potential values are
so close, if the concentration of the sodium chloride solution is increased beyond 1 M, the
second reaction will occur more readily:
2Cl–(aq) → Cl2(g) + 2e–
This results in chlorine gas being the major product of the reaction at the anode.
NOTE
It pays to carefully check the concentrations of the solutions stated in a question. Using solutions
that have a concentration other than 1 M may result in different reactions taking place to those
predicted using the electrochemical series. Having an increased concentration of one species may
mean that it reacts instead of another species predicted using the electrochemical series. This is
often observed when the electrode potential values, E0, are close together.
Exhausting the supply of reactants
Some consideration should also be given to what happens in an electrochemical cell if
one of the species is completely exhausted. If one completely reacts, the next strongest
species will start to react, provided there is another species available. For example, if the
strongest reducing agent is completely exhausted during the reaction, the next strongest
reducing agent present will then go on to react. However, it is also possible that a cell may
stop reacting. This would occur if there were no more reducing agents present in the cell,
despite a supply of oxidising agents or vice versa.
Check-in questions − Set 2
1 An electrolytic cell consists of inert graphite electrodes with a solution containing
1.00 M concentrations of lead ions, Pb2+(aq), cadmium ions, Cd2+(aq), cobalt ions,
Co2+(aq), and nitrate ions, NO3
– (aq).
a Identify the strongest reducing agent and strongest oxidising agent.
b Write the half-reactions occurring initially at the anode and cathode.
c Calculate the initial voltage required for the cell to operate.
d Predict what you will observe at the cathode over time. Justify your response.
e Predict what you will observe at the anode over time. Justify your response.
f Using equations, explain what would happen if the cell was initially set up using solid
tin electrodes instead of inert graphite electrodes.
Molten electrolytes
If you look closely at the position of water on the left-hand side of the electrochemical
series, you will notice that water is a stronger oxidising agent than many of the metal
ions: manganese, aluminium, magnesium, sodium, calcium, potassium and lithium. This
means it will be reduced at the cathode in preference to these metal ions. It is useful
to recognise that to produce any of the metals whose ions are weaker oxidising agents
than water, it must be done using a molten electrolyte, so that no water is present in the
electrochemical cell.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
7B PREDICTING THE PRODuCTS OF ELECTROLYSIS
223
Worked example 7B–2: Determining half-reactions in an electrolytic cell with
a molten electrolyte
VIDEO
WORKED
EXAMPLE 7B–2
An electrolytic cell with an aqueous 1 M magnesium chloride solution, MgCl2(aq), is set
up using platinum electrodes. Initially, the reactions occurring at each electrode are:
Anode: 2H2O(l) → O2(g) + 4H+(aq) + 4e–
Cathode: 2H2O(l) + 2e–
→ H2(g) + 2OH–(aq)
State the reactions that would occur at each electrode if the electrolyte solution was
changed to molten magnesium chloride, MgCl2(l).
Solution
Logic Process
Step 1 List the species present at each
electrode.
Molten electrolytes are at such high
temperatures that there would no longer
be any water in the cell.
Anode: Cl–(l)
Cathode: Mg2+(l)
Step 2 Write the reactions occurring at
each electrode (remembering to use
liquid for the state of any molten
species involved).
Cathode: Mg2+(l) + 2e–
→ Mg(l)
Anode: 2Cl–(l) → Cl2(g) + 2e–
7B SKILLS
Significant figures – adding and subtracting
In performing addition and subtraction operations, the rule for significant figures states
that the answer should not have more decimal places than the least accurate number in
the problem. This means that the precision of the result should match the least precise
measurement. For instance, if one number has a decimal place up to the tenths (like 7.6)
and another goes up to the hundredths (like 3.34), your final answer should only have its
decimal place up to the tenths, reflecting the least precise measurement.
For example, consider a scenario in which we are measuring cell potentials from two
separate half-cell reactions in an electrolysis set-up. The first cell potential is 1.35 V
(measured to the hundredths place) and the second cell potential is 0.8 V (measured to
the tenths place). If we are to add these two potentials together, the correct result should
only have its decimal place up to the tenths place because the least precise measurement
has only one decimal place.
Incorrectly applying significant figures might yield a result like 2.15 V. Here, the result
is precise up to the hundredths place, which violates the rule. The correct application
of significant figures would give us a result of 2.2 V, properly rounded to the tenths
place. Thus, it’s crucial to identify the least precise measurement and adjust your result
to match its level of precision to correctly apply significant figures in addition
or subtraction.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
224 CHAPTER 7 ELECTROLYTIC CELLS
Section 7B questions
1 An electrolytic cell consists of carbon electrodes immersed in an aqueous 1 M NaCl
solution.
a Write the reduction and oxidation half-equations that would take place in the cell.
b Write the overall cell equation.
c Explain what would happen if the aqueous 1 M NaCl solution was replaced with a
molten NaCl electrolyte.
d Describe what would happen if the aqueous 1 M NaCl solution was replaced with a
concentrated aqueous 5 M NaCl solution.
2 Draw a labelled diagram of an electrolytic cell made with a zinc cathode, an inert carbon
anode and an electrolyte solution containing 1 M zinc nitrate, Zn(NO3)2.
Include:
• polarity of each electrode
• direction of electron flow
• half-reactions occurring at each electrode
• overall reaction
• voltage required to force reactions to proceed (to two decimal places).
3 An electrolytic cell is set up containing a mixture of 1 M copper nitrate, 1 M nickel
nitrate and 1 M magnesium nitrate, and is electrolysed using platinum electrodes.
Initially, the reactions occurring at each electrode are:
Anode: 2H2O(l) → O2(g) + 4H+(aq) + 4e–
Cathode: Cu2+(aq) + 2e–
→ Cu(s)
a Redraw the diagram below and label the anode and cathode, including their polarity.
b Show the direction of electron flow by adding an arrow to the diagram.
c Using relevant chemical equations, explain what you would expect to happen over a
long period of time.
– +
Platinum
electrodes
Electrolyte
contains
Cu2+ ions
Ni2+ ions
Mg2+ ions
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
7C COMMERCIAL ELECTROLYTIC CELLS
225
7C
Commercial electrolytic cells
Study Design:
•
The common design features and general operating
principles of commercial electrolytic cells (including, where
practicable, the removal of products as they form), and
the selection of suitable electrode materials, the electrolyte
(including its state) and any chemical additives that result
in a desired electrolysis product (details of specific cells
not required)
•
The role of innovation in designing cells to meet society’s
energy needs in terms of producing 'green’ hydrogen
(including equations in acidic conditions) using the
following methods:
– polymer electrolyte membrane electrolysis powered by
either photovoltaic (solar) or wind energy
– artificial photosynthesis using a water oxidation and
proton reduction catalyst system
Glossary:
Electroplating
Green hydrogen
ENGAGE
Fuel for thought in the future
For a few years now, there has been strong impetus for hydrogen gas to be considered as
a future fuel. One significant factor is that hydrogen fuel cells only produce water (and
heat), so they are seen as an environmentally friendly option as society moves to phase
out the use of fossil fuels.
Hydrogen gas can be produced in several ways, including processes that use renewable
wind or solar power. So why haven’t we seen hydrogen fuel cells used more broadly in
society? There is a high cost associated with the production processes, as well as the
difficulty with storing and transporting hydrogen gas safely, as it is extremely flammable.
Perhaps once improvements and advances are made in the infrastructure required, the
use of hydrogen as a fuel will explode … metaphorically speaking!
Figure 7C–1 A hydrogen-powered bus being refuelled (left). A hydrogen gas production
facility, powered by wind energy (right)
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
226 CHAPTER 7 ELECTROLYTIC CELLS
Electroplating
an application
of electrolysis,
whereby
electrical energy
is used to
deposit a coating
of one metal
onto the surface
of another
substance
7B PREDICTING
THE PRODUCTS OF
ELECTROLYSIS
LINK
EXPLAIN
Commercial applications of electrolysis
Electrolysis is used to commercially prepare many chemicals used in society and requires
large amounts of electrical energy. As well as the cost associated with electrical energy
supply, the use of electrolysis is also influenced by the availability of suitable electrolytes
and electrodes to be used in cells. Often electrolysis is used to prevent corrosion or to
improve the aesthetics of an object. For example, electroplating is used to produce Olympic
gold medals. It is often used as the preferred method to produce chemical species on a large
scale for other applications.
In Section 7B, we explored how changing the state of the electrolyte and changing
conditions, such as the materials electrodes are made from, can affect the products of the
reactions taking place in an electrolytic cell. For commercial cells, these factors remain
crucial to ensure that the desired electrolysis product is achieved. For some cells, it may
be better to use reactive electrodes, whereas for others it may be beneficial to use inert
electrodes made from carbon or platinum. Similarly, the use of concentrated aqueous
electrolytes or molten electrolytes will potentially alter the reactions taking place in an
electrolytic cell.
Because the products of electrolysis are often more reactive than the reactants in the cell,
they must be kept separated once produced to prevent them from reacting spontaneously.
This, as well as the ability to quickly remove and capture the desirable products of the
reactions, are key design aspects for electrolytic cells.
Molten mixture
NaCl + CaCl2
Chlorine gas
Cl2(g)
Molten sodium
metal Na(l)
Iron mesh screen
–
–
Iron cathode
+
Carbon anode
Figure 7C–2 Cross-sectional diagram of the Downs cell
The Downs cell shown in Figure 7C–2 is used commercially to produce both sodium metal
and chlorine gas. The cell consists of a positive carbon anode in the centre, surrounded by a
negative iron cathode. The electrolyte is a mixture of molten sodium chloride and calcium
chloride. Aqueous sodium chloride cannot be used, as water is a stronger oxidising agent
than sodium ions and so would react preferentially at the cathode. Notice the iron mesh
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
7C COMMERCIAL ELECTROLYTIC CELLS
227
screen that separates the chlorine gas produced at the anode from the sodium metal formed
at the cathode. Should these species come into contact, they would spontaneously react
together, meaning neither product could be captured for use. This separation of products is
crucial in the design of electrolytic cells.
Another key design feature for the safe operation of these cells is to store the sodium metal
produced in a way that prevents its contact with oxygen or water. The selection of an inert
carbon anode will also ensure the desired reaction to produce chlorine gas takes place. This
minimises the need to replace the electrode as often as would be required if using a reactive
metal, such as copper or nickel.
Many commercial electrolytic cells produce dangerous chemicals, so the safe collection and
storage of these is an important consideration reflected in their design. The membrane cell
(shown in Figure 7C–3), used to produce sodium hydroxide, NaOH, is one such example
where there are products that pose a potential safety risk.
Ion exchange
+ –
Cl2(g) H2(g)
membrane
Concentrated
NaCl(aq)
H2O(I)
Titanium
anode
Steel
cathode
Dilute NaCl(aq)
NaOH(aq)
Figure 7C–3 A diagram of the membrane cell used in the production of sodium hydroxide
The membrane cell is an electrolytic cell used to produce sodium hydroxide, which also
produces chlorine gas and hydrogen gas. Water molecules undergo reduction at the
negative cathode (steel mesh), forming hydroxide ions and hydrogen gas, which because of
its explosive and highly flammable properties is removed as it is produced. Chloride ions
undergo oxidation at the positive anode, forming chlorine gas, which is also removed as it
is produced. Chlorine is a toxic gas, so needs to be collected securely to ensure that no one
operating the cell inhales it.
The membrane that separates the anode and cathode compartments in the cell also
performs an important role. It selectively allows the sodium cations, Na+, to pass through,
but prevents the hydroxide ions and chloride ions from coming into contact, which would
result in undesirable products forming.
Producing green hydrogen
Electrolysis of water
The process of electrolysing water efficiently and safely is at the forefront of current
chemical research and development around the world. There is a desire to improve the
design of electrolytic cells that can generate green hydrogen in an effort to help meet
society’s energy needs. The production of green hydrogen involves processes that use
renewable and sustainable energy, such as wind and solar power.
Green hydrogen
hydrogen
generated by
renewable
energy with
lower carbon
emissions than
other sources of
hydrogen
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
228 CHAPTER 7 ELECTROLYTIC CELLS
Figure 7C–4 Production of green hydrogen using renewable wind and solar energy
Before we look at some innovative ways this can be done, it is important to understand the
fundamental chemistry involved in the electrolysis of water.
Water can be electrolysed to produce hydrogen gas (a useful fuel) and oxygen. However,
pure water is a poor conductor of electricity, so in the laboratory process a small amount of
sulfuric acid is added to enhance the conductivity. This is a great example of how the use of
chemical additives improves the production of the desired species.
During the electrolysis of water, special collection chambers must be used for the gases
that are produced. Important safety measures must be in place to ensure the safe operation
of the electrolytic cell, but also for the storage and transport of hydrogen gas, which is
highly flammable.
The reactions occurring in the cell are as follows:
Anode reaction: 2H2O(l) → O2(g) + 4H+(aq) + 4e–
Cathode reaction: 2H2O(l) + 2e–
→ H2(g) + 2OH–(aq)
At the anode, oxygen gas is produced as well as hydrogen ions, H+, which results in a
more acidic environment around the electrode. At the cathode, hydrogen gas is produced,
as well as hydroxide ions, OH–, resulting in a more alkaline environment around the
electrode. Figure 7C–5 shows an illustration of what this may look like in the presence of
universal indicator.
The hydrogen ions and hydroxide ions produced during the reactions at each electrode
combine to form water, meaning that the overall reaction for the electrolysis of water can
be represented as follows:
2H2O(l) → 2H2(g) + O2(g)
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
7C COMMERCIAL ELECTROLYTIC CELLS
229
O2
2
4
6
H2
2
4
6
Pt Pt
Water
Anode Cathode
+ –
–+
Figure 7C–5 Electrolysis
of water into hydrogen
and oxygen gas. In the
schematic, a universal
indicator has been added
that turns red in the acidic
environment generated
around the anode and blue
in the alkaline environment
generated around the
cathode.
The production of hydrogen and oxygen occurs in a 2-to-1 ratio, which means that twice as
much gas by volume would be collected at the cathode as there would be at the anode. This
is represented in Figure 7C–5, which shows the volume of gas forming at each electrode.
Check-in questions – Set 1
1 What useful fuel can be made from the electrolysis of water?
2 Why is sulfuric acid added to water before it undergoes electrolysis?
3 What is the purpose of the iron mesh screen in the Downs cell?
Polymer electrolyte membrane electrolysis
Polymer electrolyte membrane (PEM) electrolysis is a technology used to produce high
purity ‘green’ hydrogen that can be powered by renewable energy supplies such as solar
or wind energy. Solid polymers are used as the electrolyte, which increase conductivity
and the ability to function at higher pressures. They are quite compact and operate at
low temperatures up to around 80°C, although one downside is the requirement for
expensive catalysts.
In PEM water electrolysis, water is electrochemically
PEM electrolysis
– +
split into hydrogen and oxygen. The water at the anode
is split into oxygen, O2, protons, H+, and electrons.
The electrons travel through the external circuit to
the cathode. The protons migrate through a proton-
conducting membrane to the cathode side where they
combine with the electrons and are reduced to hydrogen
gas, H2, as shown in Figure 7C–6.
H2
Anode reaction: Cathode reaction: 4H+(aq) + 4e–
Overall reaction: 2H2O(l) → 4H+(aq) + O2(g) + 4e–
→ 2H2(g)
2H2O(l) → 2H2(g) + O2(g)
Cathode
H+
O2
H2O
Anode
Membrane
Figure 7C–6 Diagram of PEM electrolysis
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
230 CHAPTER 7 ELECTROLYTIC CELLS
1B PRODUCTION
OF CHEMICAL
ENERGY IN
NATURE
LINK
Artificial photosynthesis
Natural photosynthesis, which we examined in Section 1B, occurs in two stages: a light-
dependent stage and a light-independent stage. In the light-dependent stage, energy
from light is used to split water into oxygen and protons, and then in the light-independent
stage, the protons are combined with carbon dioxide to create sugars that plants use
for energy.
Scientists have worked on replicating this biological process through what is called artificial
photosynthesis, taking inspiration from nature to convert sunlight into other forms
of energy.
One method of artificial photosynthesis known as photocatalytic water splitting creates
green hydrogen by mimicking the light-dependent stage, using visible light to create
protons and oxygen. The produced protons must then be reduced to hydrogen molecules,
but this is challenging as complete splitting is an energy-intensive, four-electron process:
Oxidation half-reaction: 2H2O(l) → 4H+(aq) + O2(g) + 4e–
Proton reduction half-reaction: 4H+(aq) + 4e–
→ 2H2(g)
Overall reaction: 2H2O(l) → 2H2(g) + O2(g)
To help overcome this high-energy requirement, catalysts are required to mediate the
transfer of electrons. Some catalysts that have been explored include manganese, titanium
dioxide and cobalt oxide.
One set-up of this system is detailed in Figure 7C–7 and uses two catalysts: a water-
oxidation catalyst and a proton-reduction catalyst. When a photon of light hits the
photosensitiser, it excites an electron, which is then donated to the semiconductor. This
electron moves through the external circuit, where it is used by the proton-reduction
catalyst to reduce hydrogen ions to hydrogen gas. To restore the charge balance in the
photosensitiser, water is oxidised using the water-oxidation catalyst, which produces
oxygen gas and electrons.
e–
Semiconductor
Photons
O2
4H+
2H2O
2H2
Water-oxidation
Photosensitiser
catalyst Proton-reduction
catalyst
Figure 7C–7 Diagram of photocatalytic water splitting
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
7C COMMERCIAL ELECTROLYTIC CELLS
231
While this process appears simple in principle, there are several design problems that must
be addressed if hydrogen is to be produced on a large scale in this manner. Catalysts can
decompose and corrode during the process, and some catalysts will only function efficiently
at certain temperatures and pressures. The hydrogen produced can mix with the oxygen,
creating a risk of explosions.
7C SKILLS
VIDEO 7C–1
SKILLS: USING
MIND MAPS
TO MAKE
CONNECTIONS
Using mind maps to make connections
Making connections between content significantly enhances memory retention and
facilitates learning. This is largely due to the way our brains inherently seek and form
patterns between information. Techniques like mind maps are valuable tools for
visualising these connections and can significantly aid in the study process.
For example, if you’re studying photosynthesis in plants and artificial photosynthesis
for producing green hydrogen, a mind map can clarify these concepts. At the centre,
you might put ‘photosynthesis’, with two branches for ‘natural’ and ‘artificial’. Under
‘natural photosynthesis’, you could note ‘uses sunlight, water, CO2’ and ‘produces glucose
and oxygen’. For ‘artificial photosynthesis’, you could specify ‘uses sunlight, water and
catalysts’ and ‘produces hydrogen and oxygen’. You might also create branches to note
that both processes capture solar energy, but their end products and uses differ: glucose
for plant growth in the case of natural photosynthesis, and green hydrogen as a renewable
energy source in the case of artificial photosynthesis. By drawing these connections, you’ll
create a more comprehensive understanding of these processes.
PHOTOSYNTHESIS
Natural photosynthesis
• uses sunlight, water, CO2
• produces glucose and oxygen
Artificial photosynthesis
• uses sunlight, water and catalysts
• produces hydrogen and oxygen
captures solar energy captures solar energy
End products:
glucose for plant growth
End products:
green hydrogen as a renewable
energy source
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
232 CHAPTER 7 ELECTROLYTIC CELLS
Section 7C questions
1 The electrolytic cell shown below is set up to yield pure copper from an impure piece
of ‘blister’ copper. The electrolyte solution contains both copper(II) sulfate and sulfuric
acid. The blister copper, Electrode I, contains a mixture of impurities, including cobalt,
gold, iron, nickel, silver and zinc. The voltage applied is specifically adjusted so that
only copper is deposited on Electrode II. During electrolysis, some ions remain in the
solution, but other metal impurities form a ‘sludge’ beneath Electrode I.
DC power
supply
Electrode I
impure copper
(blister copper)
Electrode II
copper
Copper(II) sulfate
solution with
sulfuric acid
Pure copper
being deposited
Sludge
a State the name and polarity of Electrode I.
b Write the equation for the reaction occurring at the cathode.
c List the solid metal impurities that would be found in the sludge.
2 A proton-exchange membrane cell is shown below.
Excess
fuel
Water and
heat out
H+
H2O
H+
H2
H+
H+
O2
Fuel in
Air in
Anode Cathode
Electrolyte
a Write the overall reaction for the cell.
b State the function of the electrolyte.
c A membrane is used in this cell between the anode and cathode. What is the function
of this membrane?
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
7C COMMERCIAL ELECTROLYTIC CELLS
233
3 The apparatus for the electrolysis of water is shown below.
O2
2
4
6
H2
2
4
6
Pt Pt
Water
Anode Cathode
+ –
–+
a Write the half-reactions occurring at each electrode.
b Write the overall reaction for the cell.
c If 4.5 moles of oxygen is produced at the anode, state how many moles of hydrogen
would be produced at the cathode.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
234 CHAPTER 7 ELECTROLYTIC CELLS
Faraday’s laws of electrolysis
7D
Study Design:
•
The application of Faraday’s laws and stoichiometry to determine the quantity
of electrolytic reactant and product, and the current or time required to either
use a particular quantity of reactant or produce a particular quantity of product
ENGAGE
Electroplating
Electroplating is one example of how electrolysis is used commercially. Car and
motorcycle parts are commonly plated with chrome or nickel, which give a desirable
shiny silver appearance. You may even have tapware or door handles in your house
that are chrome plated. During the electroplating process, it is important to control the
conditions to apply just the right quantity of metal coating. A layer too thin may expose
the material underneath, but if it is too thick the object may lose its shape, as well as
increasing the cost of materials unnecessarily. Chemists use Faraday’s laws of electrolysis
to help calculate the precise amounts needed for specific reactions, and in this section
you will look at ways to perform these calculations yourself.
4B
FARADAY’S
LAWS
LINK
EXPLAIN
Faraday’s laws of electrolysis
You should recall looking at Faraday’s laws in Section 4B, which are applied here to control
and calculate the quantities involved in electrolytic cells. To refresh your memory, Faraday’s
two laws of electrolysis state that:
1 The mass of a substance produced or consumed at an electrode during electrolysis is
directly proportional to the quantity of electricity passed (m ∝ Q).
2 The amounts in moles of different substances produced or consumed at electrodes by
the passage of the same amount of electricity are inversely proportional to the charges
1
on their ions (n ∝
ionic charge ).
Essentially, there are three main factors that affect the amount of product formed at the
cathode during electrolysis:
• the amount of current flowing through a cell
• the length of time current is applied
• the charge of the ion being reduced at the cathode.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
7D FARADAY’s LAWS OF ELECTROLYSIS
235
Charge (quantity of electricity) has the symbol Q. It is measured in units of coulombs (C).
The amount of charge that one mole of electrons has is 96 500 coulombs, which is Faraday’s
constant, F, and can be written as:
F = 96 500 C mol–1
The relationship between charge and the number of moles of electrons can be represented
by the relationship:
Q = n(e–) × F
where:
Q = The charge (in coulombs)
n(e–) = The amount, in moles, of electrons
F = Faraday’s constant.
Current and time are represented by the relationship:
Q = It
where:
Q = The charge (in coulombs)
I = The current (in amperes)
t = The time (in seconds).
These relationships can be used for quantitative calculations involving electrolytic cells.
Theoretical yield versus actual yield
Often the amount predicted to be deposited at the cathode will differ from the actual
amounts measured experimentally. This can be attributed to several factors, including
contaminants in the solutions, variations in current, surface area and condition of the
electrodes being used, temperature and pressure conditions, and some of the products
flaking off the electrodes.
Calculations using Faraday’s laws of electrolysis
In this section, we will look at how the two equations, Q = It and Q = n(e–) × F, can be used
to quantify the process of electrolysis. The questions you are likely to see typically involve
four steps, as outlined below.
Four key steps to solving Faraday’s laws of electrolysis questions
m
1 Determine number of moles of metal (using n =
M ).
2 Determine number of moles of electrons (using the relevant half-equation).
3 Determine the charge, Q, using Q = n(e–) × F.
4 Determine current (amps) or time (seconds), using Q = It.
NOTE
For some questions, you may have to apply the steps in reverse order. This will depend on what
the question is asking. Worked example 7D–1 is one such example, where you are required to
calculate the mass of the product at the cathode. It is worth paying extra attention to units also,
particularly those involving time.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
236 CHAPTER 7 ELECTROLYTIC CELLS
VIDEO
WORKED
EXAMPLE 7D–1
Worked example 7D–1: Calculating the mass of a product at an electrode
An electrolytic cell using a 1.0 M copper sulfate electrolyte solution is operating with
a steady current of 5.0 amps for 30 minutes. Determine the mass of copper deposited,
given that the reaction occurring at the cathode is:
Cu2+(aq) + 2e–
→ Cu(s)
Solution
Logic Process
Step 1 Convert the given time to seconds. 30 × 60 = 1800 seconds
Step 2 Calculate the charge using Q = It Q = 5.00 A × 1800 s = 9000 C
Step 3 Calculate the amount, in mol, of
electrons with 9000 C of charge
using Q = n(e–) × F.
n(e–) = Q
9000 C
=
F
96 500 C mol–1
= 0.0933 mol
Step 4 Using the ratio shown in the
half-equation, determine the
amount, in mol, of metal being
produced.
Cu2+(aq) + 2e–
→ Cu(s)
n(Cu) = 1
× n(e–)
2
1
=
× 0.0933 mol
2
= 0.0466 mol
Step 5 Determine the mass of copper
m
produced, using n =
M.
m(Cu) = n × M
M(Cu) = 63.55 g mol–1
m(Cu) = 0.0466 mol × 63.55 g mol–1 = 2.96 g
Therefore, 3.0 grams of copper is deposited
at the cathode.
VIDEO
WORKED
EXAMPLE 7D–2
Worked example 7D–2: Calculating the time to produce a product at
an electrode
Aluminium metal is produced commercially by passing a current through a molten
mixture of alumina and cryolite, using large carbon anodes. Calculate the length of time,
to the nearest minute, a current of 45 000 A would need to be passed through the cell to
generate 10.0 kg of aluminium if the reaction at the cathode is:
Al3+(l) + 3e–
→ Al(l)
Solution
Logic Process
Step 1 Determine the amount, in mol, of
metal to be produced, using n =
m
M.
Note that the question provides a mass
in kg, so that needs to first be converted
to grams.
10.0 kg × 1000 = 10 000 grams
n(Al) = m
M
10 000 g
=
26.98 g mol–1
= 370.64 mol
Step 2 Use the half-equation to determine the
amount, in mol, of electrons required.
Al3+(l) + 3e–
→ Al(l)
n(e–) = 3 × n(Al)
= 3 × 370.64 g mol–1
= 1111.93 mol
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
7D FARADAY’s LAWS OF ELECTROLYSIS
237
Step 3 Calculate the charge, using
Q = n(e–) × F.
Q = 1111.93 mol × 96 500 C mol–1
= 107 301 704.97 C needed.
Step 4 Calculate the time, using Q = It. Q
107 301 704.97 C
t =
=
I
45 000 A
= 2384.48 seconds.
Convert to minutes by dividing by 60.
2384.48 s
60 = 39.74 minutes,
rounded to the nearest minute
= 40.0 minutes.
7D SKILLS
VIDEO 7D–1
SKILLS:
PRESENTING
YOUR
CALCULATIONS
Presenting your calculations
To properly solve a calculation-based question in chemistry, there are a few critical
steps. Firstly, it’s crucial to identify the appropriate formula or equation and write it
out. This serves as your calculation’s framework, and you need to understand what each
variable represents. Secondly, review all the provided values to determine if any unit
conversions are required to maintain consistency in your equation.
Thirdly, substitute the relevant values into the equation, being cautious to align each
value with its corresponding variable. Fourthly, perform the calculation, ideally using a
calculator to ensure accuracy. Lastly, after completing the calculation, check the units of
your final answer and adjust the number of significant figures to match the least precise
measurement used in your calculation.
To illustrate, let’s apply these steps in a Faraday’s law problem in electrolysis. Suppose
we need to find the mass of silver (Ag) deposited at the cathode when a current of 0.5 A
is passed for 3 hours through a solution of silver ions. Given that silver ions gain one
electron to become silver atoms, Ag+(aq) + e–
→ Ag(s), we can use the formulas:
Q = It n(e–) = Q
m
n =
F
1 Firstly, we write out our formulas.
2 Secondly, we convert time from hours to seconds, getting 3 hours = 10 800 seconds.
3 Thirdly, we substitute our values into the first formula to calculate the total charge.
Q = 0.5 A × 10 800 s = 5400 C.
Then, we substitute the calculated charge into the second formula to find the number
of moles of electrons: n(e–) = 5400 C
96485 C mol–1 = 0.0559 mol.
4 Fourthly, we rearrange the third formula to solve for mass: m = n × M.
Substituting n(e–) and the molar mass of silver into this equation gives us:
m = 0.0559 mol × 107.87 g mol–1 = 6.03 g.
5 Lastly, after performing the calculation, we check our units (which are in grams) and
adjust the number of significant figures to reflect the least precise measurement used
in the calculation (which is the current, measured to the tenths place).
Therefore, the final answer is 6.0 g of Ag.
M
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
238 CHAPTER 7 ELECTROLYTIC CELLS
Section 7D questions
1 To the nearest minute, determine how long it will take to deposit 20.0 grams of nickel in
an electrolytic cell containing nickel sulfate, NiSO4, if a current of 3.00 amps is applied
to the cell.
2 Determine the mass of copper deposited at the cathode when 2.0 amps of current is
applied to a cell with an electrolyte containing Cu2+ for 7.0 minutes.
3 Determine the amount of current that was applied to an electrolytic cell, with an
electrolyte containing AgNO3(aq), if 3.65 grams of silver is deposited after 1.5 hours.
4 Determine the mass of magnesium produced when a current of 1.8 A is passed through
an electrolytic cell containing molten magnesium chloride, MgCl2, for 100 minutes.
5 Calculate the amount of charge, in coulombs, required to deposit 50.0 grams of copper
from a copper(II) sulfate solution, CuSO4(aq).
6 The diagram below shows an electrolytic cell containing an electrolyte. If the cell is run
with 5 A for 30 minutes, which of the following electrolytes would result in the largest
amount, in moles, deposited onto the object?
+
–
Metal
electrode
Object
Electrolyte
A 1 M AgNO3
B 1 M Cu(NO3)2
C 1 M Al(NO3)3
D 1 M Zn(NO3)2
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
239
Chapter 7 review
Summary
Create your own set of summary notes for this chapter, on paper or in a digital document. A model
summary is provided in the Teacher Resources and can be used to compare with yours.
Checklist
In the Interactive Textbook, the success criteria are linked from the review questions and will be
automatically ticked when answers are correct. Alternatively, print or photocopy this page and tick
the boxes when you have answered the corresponding questions correctly.
Success criteria – I am now able to: Linked questions
7A.1 7A.2 7A.3 7A.4 7A.5 7B.1 7B.2 7B.3 7B.4 7B.5 7C.1 7C.2 7C.3 7C.4 7C.5  Explain the importance of the key design features of electrolytic
cells
 Identify, name, draw and label features of electrolytic cells,
including polarity of electrodes and the direction of electron flow
 Identify key similarities and differences between the design
features of galvanic and electrolytic cells
 Understand the energy transfers involved in discharging and
recharging of electrolytic cells
 Identify key features of secondary cells that allow them to
be recharged
 Predict and compare the products of electrolysis when using
molten and aqueous electrolytes
 Predict and compare the products of electrolysis when using
different electrodes, including inert electrodes
 Predict and compare the products of electrolysis using the
electrochemical series, including situations where there is
competition at the electrodes
 Understand the effect of electrolyte concentration on the products
at the electrodes
 Write balanced half-equations and balanced overall equations for
specific electrolytic cells
 Identify key design features of commercial electrolytic cells that
make them suitable to produce specific chemicals
 Explain how the selection of both the electrolyte and the type
of electrodes used will influence the products generated by
commercial electrolytic cells
 Describe ways that cells can be designed to enhance energy
efficiency
 Describe ways that green chemistry principles can be applied
to make the use of electrochemical cells more sustainable and
environmentally friendly
 Describe how the electrolysis of water and artificial
photosynthesis can be adapted to produce ‘green’ hydrogen
13☐
3☐, 13☐
2☐, 11☐
11☐, 12☐
12☐
1☐, 4☐, 6☐, 13☐
5☐, 13☐
13☐
5☐
12☐, 13☐
17☐
17☐
17☐
17☐
17☐
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
240
7D.1 7D.2  Understand the stoichiometric relationship between the quantity
of metal and electrons represented by half-equations in the
electrochemical series
 Apply Faraday’s laws to calculate the quantity of product, current
or time required for an electrolytic cell
15☐, 16☐
14☐
Multiple-choice questions
1 What are the products when molten potassium chloride undergoes electrolysis?
Cathode Anode
A Cl K
B K Cl2
C Cl2 K
D K Cl
2
Identify the correct statement about electrolysis.
A Reduction occurs at the anode.
B Cations flow from the anode to the cathode.
C Electrons flow from the cathode to the anode.
D The polarity of the cathode is negative.
3 In an electrolytic cell, which of the following is true for the anode?
A It is the positive electrode, and it is the site of reduction.
B It is the positive electrode, and it is the site of oxidation.
C It is the negative electrode, and it is the site of reduction.
D It is the negative electrode, and it is the site of oxidation.
4 Which of the following combinations of products are correct for an electrolysis reaction at SLC
using molten sodium chloride and inert electrodes?
Cathode Anode
A Na Cl2
B Cl2 Na
C H2 Cl2
D Cl2 H2
5 Which of the following combinations of products are correct for an electrolysis reaction at SLC
using concentrated aqueous sodium chloride solution and inert electrodes?
Cathode Anode
A Na Cl2
B Cl2 Na
C H2 Cl2
D Cl2 H2
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
241
6 When molten lead(II) bromide is electrolysed
A lead ions lose electrons at the cathode to form lead.
B lead ions lose electrons at the anode to form lead.
C lead ions gain electrons at the cathode to form lead.
D lead ions gain electrons at the anode to form lead.
7 The electrolysis of which salt would result in the same products irrespective of whether it is an
aqueous or molten electrolyte being used?
A copper(II) bromide
B copper(II) fluoride
C magnesium bromide
D magnesium fluoride
8 During the electrolysis of an aqueous metal salt, the metal is reduced and deposited at the
cathode. Which one of the following would not affect the mass deposited at the cathode?
A the amount of current passed through the cell
B the amount of voltage passed through the cell
C the charge on the metal ion
D the molar mass of the metal
9 When 4.0 A of current is passed through an electrolytic cell containing a molten sodium
chloride electrolyte for 30.0 minutes, the mass of sodium produced would be closest to
A 1.72 grams.
B 0.029 grams.
C 3.43 grams.
D 0.85 grams.
10 In the electrolysis apparatus shown below, 5.87 grams of nickel is deposited on the cathode of
the Cell I. Determine the mass of silver, Ag, deposited at the cathode of Cell II.
Ni Ag
NiSO4(aq)
AgNO3(aq)
Cell I Cell II
A 5.39 grams
B 5.87 grams
C 10.79 grams
D 21.58 grams
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
242
Short-answer questions
11 Galvanic and electrolytic cells are two types of electrochemical cells that share some
similarities and differences. Indicate whether each of the statements below applies
to galvanic cells only, electrolytic cells only, both galvanic and electrolytic cells, or
neither galvanic nor electrolytic cells.
a Electrical energy is converted to chemical energy. b Electrons flow from the cathode to the anode. c The polarity of the anode is negative. d A non-spontaneous redox reaction takes place. e Oxidation occurs at the anode. f Electrons flow through the conductive wire (external circuit). (1 mark)
(1 mark)
(1 mark)
(1 mark)
(1 mark)
(1 mark)
12 Lead–acid batteries are a type of secondary cell commonly used in cars. A lead–acid
battery consists of a spongy lead electrode and a lead dioxide electrode immersed in
an electrolytic solution of sulfuric acid. The overall spontaneous chemical reaction is:
PbO2(s) + Pb(s) + 2H2SO4(aq) → 2PbSO4(s) + 2H2O(l)
a What is a secondary cell and how does it differ from a primary cell? b What feature of the lead–acid battery enables it to be recharged? (1 mark)
(1 mark)
c Write balanced half-equations for the reactions occurring at each electrode
during discharge. (2 marks)
i Anode:
ii Cathode:
d Write balanced half-equations for the reactions occurring at each electrode
during recharge. (2 marks)
i Anode:
ii Cathode:
e What is the polarity of the lead dioxide electrode during discharge and recharge? f What energy transfers are involved during discharge and recharge? (1 mark)
(1 mark)
13 Aluminium metal can be extracted from aluminium chloride, AlCl3, via electrolysis,
using graphite electrodes.
a Draw a diagram of a molten aluminium chloride electrolytic cell. Include:
• the polarity of each electrode
• direction of electron flow
• half-reactions occurring at each electrode
• overall reaction
• voltage required to force reactions to proceed (to two decimal places). (6 marks)
b If the molten aluminium chloride electrolyte is replaced with an aqueous
solution of aluminium chloride, the cell no longer functions to produce
aluminium metal. Explain why this is the case with the use of balanced
chemical equations. (2 marks)
c The graphite anode is replaced with an aluminium electrode.
i What product would be formed at the anode? (1 mark)
ii Describe any observations you might expect to see on replacing the graphite
electrode with aluminium. (1 mark)
d A porous membrane is used in this cell between the anode and the cathode. What is
the function of this membrane? (1 mark)
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
243
14 How many minutes does it take to deposit 1.50 grams of copper from a copper(II)
sulfate solution, CuSO4(aq), applying a current of 4.75 A? (2 marks)
15 An electrolytic cell produces 7.90 g of metal per hour when a current of 10.0 A is
applied. If the cation in the salt has a 3+ charge, what is the metal? (2 marks)
16 Electrolysis of a molten iron compound with a current of 1.5 A for 30 minutes yields
0.52 g of iron metal at the cathode. Calculate the charge on the iron ions. (2 marks)
17 One of the biggest challenges currently being faced is how to improve industrial and
commercial chemistry processes to make them more environmentally friendly.
a Commercial electrolytic cells play a critical role in various industrial processes.
Discuss two design enhancements that could be made to these cells to improve
their efficiency.  (2 marks)
b Environmental sustainability is a growing concern in industrial practices.
Suggest two modifications to the design or operation of commercial electrolytic
cells that could make them more environmentally friendly.  (2 marks)
c Artificial photosynthesis is an emerging technology that mimics the natural
process of photosynthesis in plants to produce green hydrogen. Briefly explain
how this process works.  (1 mark)
d One of the key aspects of commercial electrolytic cells is the choice of electrolyte
and electrodes. How do these choices impact the products formed in the cell?
Provide an example to support your answer.  (2 marks)
e The production of green hydrogen through artificial photosynthesis has been
hailed as a potential solution to energy storage issues associated with renewable
energy sources. Explain why this is the case.  (1 mark)
7B
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
244 UNIT 3 REVISION EXERCISE
Unit 3 Revision exercise
Multiple-choice questions
1 Which one of the following statements about fossil fuels is correct?
A Fossil fuels are primarily formed through the process of photosynthesis.
B Fossil fuels are renewable resources that can be replenished within a short period
of time.
C Fossil fuels are non-renewable resources formed from the remains of plants and
animals millions of years ago.
D Fossil fuels are composed of hydrocarbons and impurities obtained through mining
and drilling.
2 A reaction has the energy profile shown below.
Energy (kJ mol–1)
240
200
160
120
80
40
0
Progress of reaction
Which of the following represents the energy profile of the reverse reaction?
∆H (kJ mol–1) Activation energy (kJ mol–1)
A +80 160
B –80 160
C +80 80
D –80 80
3 Which of the following reactions would release the greatest mass of carbon dioxide gas?
A complete combustion of 10 g of methane
B complete combustion of 10 mole of methane
C complete combustion of 10 g of ethane
D complete combustion of 10 mole of ethane
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
UNIT 3 REVISION EXERCISE
245
4 Equal amounts of warm ethanol (c(ethanol) = 2.46 J g–1
K–1) at 60°C and cool water
(c(H2O) = 4.186 J g–1
K–1) at 10°C are mixed in a beaker. Which of the following
statements correctly describes the system?
A Heat energy is transferred from the water to the ethanol as the specific heat capacity
of water is higher than ethanol.
B Heat energy is transferred from the ethanol to the water until the average
temperature of 45°C is reached.
C The final temperature of the solution will be closer to 60°C than 10°C, as the
specific heat capacity of water is higher than ethanol.
D The final temperature of the solution will be closer to 10°C than 60°C, as the
specific heat capacity of water is higher than ethanol.
5 A galvanic cell is set up as shown in the diagram below.
Ag
Fe
Salt bridge
1.0 M Ag2(SO4) 1.0 M Fe(SO4)
When the cell is operating
A electrons move from the Ag electrode to the Fe electrode.
B the mass of the Ag electrode increases.
C Fe2+ ions move toward the Ag electrode.
D the concentration of Ag+ ions increases.
6 Some galvanic cells made up of three half-cells (Y3+/Y2+, X+/X and Z2+/Z+) are set up
under standard conditions. Using the information about the combinations shown, what
is the correct order of increasing cell potential?
Y3+ + Z+ → Y2+ + Z2+
X+ + Z+ → X + Z2+
X+ + Y2+ → no reaction
Z2+ + X → no reaction
A Z < X < Y
B Y < X < Z
C X < Y < Z
D Z < Y < X
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
246 UNIT 3 REVISION EXERCISE
7 The overall equation for a glucose fuel cell is
C6H12O6(aq) + 6O2(g) → 6CO2(g) + 6H2O(l)
The equation for the reaction that occurs at the anode in this fuel cell is
A C6H12O6(aq) + 6H2O(l) → 6O2(g) + 24H+(aq) + 24e–
B 6O2(g) + 24H+(aq) + 24e–
→ C6H12O6(aq) + 6H2O(l)
C 2H2O(l) → O2(g) + 4H+(aq) + 4e–
D O2(g) + 4H+(aq) + 4e–
→ 2H2O(l)
8 In a galvanic cell, a copper anode is used, and its mass decreases by 0.25 g during
operating. The current passing through the cell is 0.4 A. What is the approximate time
the cell was running for?
A 8 minutes
B 15 minutes
C 30 minutes
D 45 minutes
9 Which statements correctly describe the effect of increasing the temperature of
a reaction?
I  The activation energy is decreased, enabling more particles to react.
II  The activation energy is unchanged but a higher proportion of particles have
kinetic energy above this level.
III  The average kinetic energy of particles is increased, allowing a higher proportion to
collide successfully.
A I only
B II only
C III only
D II and III
10 Refer to the following information for Questions 10 and 11.
Nitrogen dioxide, NO2, and nitrogen tetroxide, N2O4, form an equilibrium system,
described by:
2NO2(g) ⇌ N2O4(g) brown colourless
ΔH = −57.2 kJ mol−1
Which of the following would increase both the rate of the forward reaction and the
yield of nitrogen tetroxide produced?
A decreasing the pressure
B increasing the pressure
C increasing the temperature
D adding a catalyst
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
UNIT 3 REVISION EXERCISE
247
11 12 Nitrogen tetroxide gas is injected into a sealed vessel (of fixed volume) containing
an equilibrium mixture of nitrogen dioxide and nitrogen tetroxide. Which of the
following correctly describes the changes that will occur as the system shifts towards
a new equilibrium?
A The colour will become lighter.
B The temperature will increase.
C The proportion of N2O4 to NO2 will decrease.
D The concentration of NO2 will decrease.
If an equilibrium is established by initially adding equimolar amounts of A and B to a
1 L vessel, which of the following conditions must be true once the mixture achieves
equilibrium?
2A + B ⇌ 2C K = 0.1
13 A [A] = [B]
B [A] = [C]
C [A] < [B]
D [A] > [B]
A diagram of an electrochemical cell is shown on
the right.
Which of the following gives the correct
combination of the anode and the electrolyte in
the oxidation half-cell?
e–
Load
W
Z
Salt bridge
Anode Electrolyte (oxidation half-cell)
A Z X
B Z Y
C W Y
X
Y
D W X

14
15 When molten potassium chloride, KCl(l), is electrolysed, the product formed at the
cathode is
A potassium liquid, K(l).
B chorine gas, Cl2(g).
C oxygen gas, O2(g).
D potassium ions, K+
.
A current of 5.3 A is applied to an electrolytic cell for 305 minutes, resulting in the
deposition of 0.5 mol of metal at the cathode. The metal is most likely to be
A lithium.
B aluminium.
C sodium.
C magnesium.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
248 UNIT 3 REVISION EXERCISE
Short-answer questions
1 E10 fuel is a type of fuel that contains 10% ethanol and 90% petrol. Ethanol is
derived from renewable sources such as corn or sugarcane. E10 fuel is commonly
used as an alternative to regular petrol due to its potential environmental benefits
and potential to reduce reliance on fossil fuels. The energy content of ethanol is
approximately 23.4 MJ L–1, while the energy content of petrol is approximately
34.2 MJ L–1
.  (12 marks)
a Explain why ethanol is considered a renewable fuel.  (2 marks)
b Explain, with the aid of a balanced chemical reaction, how ethanol is
produced in plants such as corn and sugarcane.  (2 marks)
c Discuss two potential environmental benefits of using E10 fuel
compared to regular petrol.  (2 marks)
d Explain why E10 is more viscous than regular petrol under the
same conditions.  (2 marks)
e Calculate the energy content of 1 L of E10 fuel.  (2 marks)
f Calculate the number of litres of E10 fuel that are required to be
burned to produce the same amount of energy as 2 L of petrol.  2 The following diagram shows a galvanic cell.  (2 marks)
(9 marks)
Fe
Salt bridge Ag
Fe2+(aq) Ag+(aq)
a Write a balanced chemical equation to represent the spontaneous reaction
occurring in the cell.  b Identify the oxidant and the reductant. c Calculate the standard cell potential. d Draw arrows on the diagram to indicate the direction of electron flow. (1 mark)
(1 mark)
(1 mark)
(1 mark)
e A salt bridge connects the two sides of the galvanic cell.
i Suggest a suitable material for the salt bridge.  (1 mark)
ii Provide two explanations why the material selected in part i
is suitable.  (2 marks)
f Calculate the mass change of the anode if this cell runs with a constant
current of 5.0 amps for four minutes. Indicate whether the mass decreases
or increases.  (2 marks)
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
UNIT 3 REVISION EXERCISE
249
3 A methanol–oxygen acidic fuel cell, also known as a direct methanol fuel cell
(DMFC), is an electrochemical device that generates electricity through
the oxidation of methanol and the reduction of oxygen in an acidic
environment. (13 marks)
a Fill in the empty boxes on the diagram below, indicating the materials
entering and exiting the anode and cathode of the DMFC. (4 marks)
e–
Load
Electrolyte
Anode Cathode
b i Write an equation for the balanced overall redox reaction that occurs in
this cell. (1 mark)
ii Write the balanced half-cell equation that occurs at the anode. iii Write the balanced half-cell equation that occurs at the cathode. (1 mark)
(1 mark)
c Explain the role of the solid polymer electrolyte membrane in a
methanol–oxygen acidic fuel cell. d The fuel cell is operated at an average current of 6.2 A over a six-hour period.
i Calculate the amount, in mol, of CO2 produced by the fuel cell. (2 marks)
(2 marks)
ii Calculate the amount of energy, in kilojoules, that would be produced
if the fuel cell operates at an efficiency of 65%. 4 The carbonic acid-bicarbonate buffer system is an essential equilibrium process that
helps maintain the pH balance in the human body. (2 marks)
(6 marks)
The first step of the equilibrium process involves the dissolution of carbon dioxide
(CO2) in water, forming carbonic acid (H2CO3):
CO2(aq) + H2O(l) ⇌ H2CO3(aq) K = 1.7 × 10–3
Carbonic acid can then dissociate into hydrogen ions (H+) and bicarbonate ions
(HCO3
–) according to the second equilibrium:
H2CO3(aq) ⇌ H+(aq) + HCO3
–(aq) K = 2.5 × 10–4
a Write the equilibrium expression for the first equilibrium process. (1 mark)
b Calculate the ratio of bicarbonate ions (HCO3
–) to carbonic acid (H2CO3),
given a H+ concentration of 10–7.4 M. c Using Le Châtelier’s principle, describe how an increase in CO2 concentration in the
human body would alter the concentration of H+ ions. (2 marks)
(3 marks)
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
250 UNIT 3 REVISION EXERCISE
5 The information below relates to an experiment that a student conducted. You are
provided with the aim, method and recorded results.
Aim: To investigate how the amount of charge passing through an electroplating cell
affects the mass of metal deposited at the cathode.
2 V
Ammeter
+
–
Nickel electrode
(anode)
Cobalt electrode
(cathode)
Nickel sulfate solution
(NiSO4(aq))
Method:
1 Weigh and record the mass of the cobalt cathode.
2 Set up the cell as shown.
3 Turn the power on and start the timer at the same time.
4 Record the current as shown on the ammeter.
5 Turn the power off after 10.0 minutes.
6 Carefully remove the cobalt cathode, gently pat it dry and record the mass.
Results:
Current 1.20 A
Initial mass of cobalt cathode 2.023 g
Mass of cobalt cathode after 10.0 minutes 2.185 g
The following questions relate to the information regarding the student’s experiment
described above. (10 marks)
a Faraday’s first law identifies the relationship between the amount of charge
flowing through a circuit and the mass of metal deposited at the cathode.
What is the predicted effect of doubling the charge flowing through an
electroplating cell, on the mass of metal deposited at the cathode? (1 mark)
b Explain the advantage, in a nickel-plating cell, of using a nickel anode
rather than an inert electrode such as graphite. (1 mark)
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
UNIT 3 REVISION EXERCISE
251
c Write the ionic half-equation for the reduction reaction occurring
in this cell. (1 mark)
d Use the student’s results to answer the following questions.
i Determine the amount of electrons, in mol, that flowed through the
cell in the first 10.0 minutes. (2 marks)
ii Calculate the theoretical mass of nickel that could be deposited at
the cathode in the first 10.0 minutes. (2 marks)
iii Compare the theoretical mass with the mass actually deposited and
suggest one reason for the discrepancy. (1 mark)
e Suggest two modifications to the method that would improve the
accuracy of the student’s results. Justify each suggestion. (2 marks)
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
252
UNIT
4
HOW ARE CARBON-BASED COMPOUNDS DESIGNED
FOR PURPOSE?
CHAPTER
8
STRUCTURE AND PROPERTIES
OF ORGANIC COMPOUNDS
Introduction
The study of organic chemistry is about understanding the structure, bonding,
properties and reactivity of carbon-based compounds. Over 20 million
carbon-based organic compounds are currently known, accounting for over
90% of all chemical compounds. The properties of organic compounds have
been used by scientists to innovate substances such as fuels, medicines, plastics,
fibres, dyes, detergents, perfumes and insecticides. Organic molecules also form
the basis of all cells in living organisms. Naturally, we must wonder what makes
carbon such a special element.
To begin answering this question, this chapter looks at how carbon bonds with other atoms to
form molecules of a diverse nature. We will explore how this diversity can be organised into
families of carbon compounds, represented by structural drawings and named using a systematic
set of rules. We will then apply our knowledge of structure and bonding to predict and compare
the physical properties of organic molecules.
INTRODUCTION
VIDEO
STRUCTURE AND
PROPERTIES
OF ORGANIC
COMPOUNDS
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
253
Curriculum
Area of Study 1 Outcome 1
How are organic compounds categorised and synthesised?
Study Design: Learning intentions – at the end of the
chapter I will be able to:
•
•
Characteristics of the carbon atom that
contribute to the diversity of organic
compounds formed, with reference to
valence electron number, relative bond
strength, relative stability of carbon
bonds with other elements, degree
of unsaturation, and the formation of
structural isomers
Molecular, structural and semi-
structural (condensed) formulas and
skeletal structures of alkanes (including
cyclohexane), alkenes, benzene,
haloalkanes, primary amines, primary
amides, alcohols (primary, secondary and
tertiary), aldehydes, ketones, carboxylic
acids and non-branched esters
8A Structural diversity in organic
compounds
8A.1  Recall that carbon prefers to form
covalent bonds due to its number of
valence electrons
8A.2  Describe the features of covalent
bonds, including relative bond strength
and bond stability
8A.3  Recognise that hydrocarbons
(including alkanes and alkenes) can
form structural isomers
8A.4  Represent the molecular, structural
and semi-structural formulas, as well
as the skeletal structures, of organic
compounds
•
•
•
The International Union of Pure and
Applied Chemistry (IUPAC) systematic
naming of organic compounds up to
C8, with no more than two functional
groups for a molecule, limited to non-
cyclic hydrocarbons, haloalkanes, primary
amines, alcohols (primary, secondary and
tertiary), aldehydes, ketones, carboxylic
acids and non-branched esters
Molecular, structural and semi-
structural (condensed) formulas and
skeletal structures of alkanes (including
cyclohexane), alkenes, benzene,
haloalkanes, primary amines, primary
amides, alcohols (primary, secondary and
tertiary), aldehydes, ketones, carboxylic
acids and non-branched esters
Characteristics of the carbon atom that
contribute to the diversity of organic
compounds formed, with reference to
valence electron number, relative bond
strength, relative stability of carbon
bonds with other elements, degree
of unsaturation, and the formation of
structural isomers
8B  Molecules of carbon
8B.1  Determine the systematic IUPAC
names of alkanes and alkenes
(including branched isomers) from
their structures
8B.2  Draw the structural, semi-structural
and skeletal formulas of alkanes and
alkenes from their IUPAC names
8B.3  Determine the degree of unsaturation
from a compound’s molecular formula
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
254
Study Design: Learning intentions – at the end of the
chapter I will be able to:
•
•
The International Union of Pure and
Applied Chemistry (IUPAC) systematic
naming of organic compounds up to
C8, with no more than two functional
groups for a molecule, limited to non-
cyclic hydrocarbons, haloalkanes, primary
amines, alcohols (primary, secondary and
tertiary), aldehydes, ketones, carboxylic
acids and non-branched esters
Molecular, structural and semi-
structural (condensed) formulas and
skeletal structures of alkanes (including
cyclohexane), alkenes, benzene,
haloalkanes, primary amines, primary
amides, alcohols (primary, secondary and
tertiary), aldehydes, ketones, carboxylic
acids and non-branched esters
8C Functional groups: haloalkanes,
amines and alcohols
8C.1  Determine the systematic IUPAC
names of haloalkanes, amines and
alcohols from their structures
8C.2  Draw the structural, semi-structural
and skeletal formulas of haloalkanes,
amines and alcohols from their IUPAC
names
8C.3  Identify and explain the structural
features of primary, secondary and
tertiary alcohols
•
•
The International Union of Pure and
Applied Chemistry (IUPAC) systematic
naming of organic compounds up to
C8, with no more than two functional
groups for a molecule, limited to non-
cyclic hydrocarbons, haloalkanes, primary
amines, alcohols (primary, secondary and
tertiary), aldehydes, ketones, carboxylic
acids and non-branched esters
Molecular, structural and semi-
structural (condensed) formulas and
skeletal structures of alkanes (including
cyclohexane), alkenes, benzene,
haloalkanes, primary amines, primary
amides, alcohols (primary, secondary and
tertiary), aldehydes, ketones, carboxylic
acids and non-branched esters
8D Functional groups: aldehydes,
ketones, carboxylic acids and esters
8D.1  Determine the systematic IUPAC
names of aldehydes, ketones,
carboxylic acids and non-branched
esters from their structures
8D.2  Draw the structural, semi-structural
and skeletal formulas of aldehydes,
ketones, carboxylic acids, non-
branched esters and primary amides
from their IUPAC names
8D.3  Determine the systematic IUPAC
names of organic compounds with two
functional groups
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
255
Study Design: Learning intentions – at the end of the
chapter I will be able to:
•
Trends in physical properties within
homologous series (boiling point and
melting point, viscosity), with reference to
structure and bonding
8E Physical properties of organic
compounds
8E.1  Recall the key features of different
types of intermolecular forces/bonding
8E.2  Identify the intermolecular forces/
bonds present in different families of
organic molecules
8E.3  Discuss the trends in physical
properties (boiling point, melting point,
viscosity) with reference to structure
and bonding of molecules within a
homologous series
VCE Chemistry Study Design extracts © VCAA; reproduced by permission.
Glossary
Alcohol
Aldehyde
Alkanol
Alkyl group
Amide functional group
Amine
Amino functional group
Aromatic compound
Boiling point
Bond strength
Branched isomer
Carbonyl group
Carboxyl group
Carboxylic acid
Cyclic alkane
Cycloalkane
Degree of unsaturation
Delocalised electron
Dimer
Ester
Ester functional group
Fluid
Functional group
Functional group isomer
Haloalkane
Homologous series
Hydroxyl group
Ketone
Kinetic energy
Melting point
Molecular formula
n-Alkane
Parent hydrocarbon
Polyunsaturated
Positional isomer
Primary alcohol (1° alcohol)
Primary amide
Saturated
Secondary alcohol (2° alcohol)
Semi-structural formula
Skeletal formula
Skeletal isomer
Straight-chain alkane
Structural isomer
Structural formula
Tertiary alcohol (3° alcohol)
Unsaturated
Valence electron
Valence shell
Valence shell electron pair
repulsion (VSEPR)
Vapour pressure
Viscosity
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
256 CONCEPT MAP
Concept map
Alkanes
Alkenes
Benzene
Structural formula
Skeletal formula
H
HC
H
Primary amides
Aldehydes
Ketones
Carboxylic acids
Esters
8A Structural diversity in organic compounds
Molecular, structural, semi-structural
and skeletal formulas
H
H C H
H
H C
H
H
C
H
H
C H
H
H
H C
H
H
C
H
H
C
H
H
C H
H
H
H C
H
C
H
H
C
H
H
C
H
Haloalkanes
Primary amines
Alcohols
8B Molecules of carbon 8C Functional groups: haloalkanes,
8D Functional groups: aldehydes,
amines and alcohols
ketones, carboxylic acids and esters
H
C
H H
Ethyl group Ethyl
Ethyl
group
Amino functional group
C H H
group
O
H
H
C
H
H
C
H
H
C
H
C
H
H H
C
C
H
H
H
Parent
hydrocarbon
H
C
C
H
Methyl
group
H
C
H
CH3CH2CH2CH(CH2CH3)CH2CH2CH(CH3)CH3
H
H
Parent
hydrocarbon Methyl
group Parent
hydrocarbon
Methyl
group
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H H C
C
CH
N
H C
N
CH
C
N
H
H
H
CH3NH2
methanamine
H
H
H
H
H
H
CH3CH2NH2
ethanamine
CH3CH2CH2NH2
propan-1-amine
C
O H
H
H
H
O
H
H C
C
C
H C
O H
+ +
O C
H
H
H
H
H
H
O
RCOOH RCOOR’
+
HOR’ H2O+
Comparison of physical properties, like boiling point, melting point and viscosity, due to the organic compound’s structure and bonding
H
8E Physical properties of organic compounds
Boiling point of compounds with different types of intermolecular bonding
Boiling point (°c)
160
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
Pentane
Pent-1-ene
1-chloropropane
Methyl ethanoate
Butan-2-one
Butanal
Butan-1-amine
Butan-1-oI
Propanoic acid
Compound
Strongest type of
intermolecular bonding
Dispersion forces only
Dipole–dipole forces
Hydrogen bonding
See the Interactive Textbook for an interactive version of this concept map
interlinked with all concept maps for the course.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
8A STRUCTURAL DIvERSITy IN ORGANIC COMPOUNDS
257
8A
Structural diversity in organic
compounds
Study Design:
•
Characteristics of the carbon atom
that contribute to the diversity
of organic compounds formed,
with reference to valence electron
number, relative bond strength,
relative stability of carbon bonds
with other elements, degree of
unsaturation, and the formation of
structural isomers
•
Molecular, structural and semi-
structural (condensed) formulas
and skeletal structures of alkanes
(including cyclohexane), alkenes,
benzene, haloalkanes, primary
amines, primary amides, alcohols
(primary, secondary and tertiary),
aldehydes, ketones, carboxylic
acids and non-branched esters
Glossary:
Alkyl group
Bond strength
Functional group
Functional group isomer
Molecular formula
Parent hydrocarbon
Positional isomer
Semi-structural formula
Skeletal formula
Skeletal isomer
Structural isomer
Structural formula
Valence electron
Valence shell
Valence shell electron pair repulsion
(VSEPR)
ENGAGE
Origins of organic carbon
As you may be aware, the carbon cycle describes the journey of carbon atoms on our
planet (Figure 8A–1). The processes in the carbon cycle directly relate to how we obtain
food, energy and numerous other vital resources. In an ideal world, the processes that
contribute to the atmospheric levels of carbon dioxide (CO2) would be balanced by those
that consume atmospheric CO2.
CO2
in the atmosphere
Carbon dioxide
Auto and factory emission
Plant respiration
Animal respiration Photosynthesis
Dead organisms and waste products
Fossils and fossil fuels
Figure 8A–1 The carbon cycle
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
258 CHAPTER 8 STRUCTURE AND PROPERTIES OF ORGANIC COMPOUNDS
1B
PRODUCTION
OF CHEMICAL
ENERGY IN
NATURE
LINK
Now, we can view the carbon cycle with some fresh perspectives. The living organisms in
the carbon cycle are mostly made up of organic forms of carbon (carbohydrate, protein
and fats). Most sources of food are also made up of predominantly organic carbon. But
where does all the organic carbon come from? The answer can be found on the carbon
cycle in a vital process called photosynthesis. Using atmospheric CO2, plants use the
process of photosynthesis to convert inorganic carbon (CO2) into organic carbon in the
form of glucose (C6H12O6). In fact, plants contribute over 90% of the organic carbon
available in our biosphere. This organic carbon then becomes the sustenance for every
other living organism on the planet.
Valence electron
an electron
found in the
outermost shell
of an atom
Valence shell
the outermost
shell of an atom
EXPLAIN
Carbon is at the centre of organic chemistry
Studying organic chemistry gives us insights into life, medicine and materials. When we
mention organic compounds, we are talking about carbon-based compounds. Carbon atoms,
linked by single, double and triple covalent bonds, form the framework of all organic molecules
while other elements like H, N and O complete the picture. In this section, we explore what
makes carbon such a unique and versatile element. We begin with a fundamental assessment
of carbon’s electron configuration and how that relates to its properties in bonding.
Valence electron number
Carbon occupies an interesting position in the periodic table (Figure 8A–2). Being in group
14, carbon has four valence electrons in its valence shell. During bonding, carbon prefers to
share its four valance electrons to achieve stability. As a result, carbon usually forms four
covalent bonds with up to four other non-metallic atoms. What makes carbon special in
comparison to elements in other groups is that it can form bonds with one or more other
carbon atoms, resulting in structures that resemble chains or rings. This feature means that
carbon-based molecules can adopt a diverse range of possible structures.
1
18
2
1413
1615
17
H
1
He
10
Li
3
Be
4
B
5
C
6
N
7
O
8
F
9
Ne
10
Na
11
MG
12
Al
13
Si
14
P
15
S
16
Cl
17
Ar
18
Valence shell
electron pair
repulsion
(VSEPR)
a model used
to predict the
geometric shape
of molecules
based on the
number of
valence shell
electron pairs
surrounding the
central atoms in
molecules
Figure 8A–2 Carbon’s electron configuration and position on the periodic table
Diversity in molecular structures
An important feature of covalent molecules is the diversity of their structures. Consider a
single carbon atom with its four valence electrons. For it to become stable, it shares its four
valence electrons through covalent bonding with other non-metallic atoms. This means
that each carbon atom forms four covalent bonds with up to four neighbouring atoms.
These covalent bonds can range between single bonds, double bonds and triple bonds (not
covered in this Study Design). The type of covalent bonds and number of neighbouring
atoms around the central carbon influences the molecular shape according to valence shell
electron pair repulsion (VSEPR) theory (Figure 8A–3).
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
8A STRUCTURAL DIvERSITy IN ORGANIC COMPOUNDS
259
C
H
O
O
N
C
C
C
H
H
H
H
O
H
H
Tetrahedral
Trigonal planar
Linear
Figure 8A–3 Carbon-based molecules can adopt a diverse
range of shapes.
Carbon’s neighbouring atoms can range between H, C, N, O, P and S, and any of the
group 17 halogens, to name only the common candidates (Figure 8A–4). Different
functional groups arise depending on the types of atoms around the carbon atom, which
influence the physical and chemical properties of the molecule.
F
H
O
O
C
C
Cl
OH
F
H
C
H OH
C
H NH2
Cl
H
Haloalkane
Alcohol
Carboxylic acid Carboxamide
Figure 8A–4 Carbon can bond to a diverse range of atoms.
Finally, if any one or more of these neighbouring atoms is another C atom, the size of the
molecule increases. Each new carbon added to the molecule brings further opportunity for
diversity (Figure 8A–5).
C C C C C C C C C C
Figure 8A–5 Carbon-based molecules increase in size as the number of carbon
atoms increases.
In summary, the vast structural diversity of carbon-based molecules is possible because
countless variations in molecular shape, functional group and molecular size are possible. This
structural diversity is what gives organic molecules their interesting and useful properties.
Bond strength and stability
When we envisage a covalent bond, we think of a model involving two atoms with shared
electrons between them. The negative charge from the electrons electrostatically attracts the
positive nuclei of the two atoms and thus results in the two atoms being covalently bonded.
However, not all covalent bonds are equal. For example, a C–H bond is different from a
C–Br bond because hydrogen and bromine have different electronegativities and atomic
radii. These differences in atomic properties influence the strength of the covalent bond.
Physically, we can determine the strength of a covalent bond by measuring how much
energy is required to break it (Figure 8A–6 on the following page). The energy (in kJ)
required to break one mole (mol) of bonds between two specific atoms in the gaseous
state is called its bond strength or average bond energy. Higher bond strength = stronger
bond = more stable bond. Table 8A–1 on the following page gives the average bond energy
for some common bonds found in organic chemistry.
Functional group
an atom or a
group of atoms
in an organic
molecule
that largely
determines
the molecule’s
properties and
reactions
LINK
LINK
8C
FUNCTIONAL
GROUPS:
HALOALKANES,
AMINES AND
ALCOHOLS
8D
FUNCTIONAL
GROUPS:
ALDEHYDES,
KETONES,
CARBOXYLIC ACIDS
AND ESTERS
LINK UNIT 1
Bond strength
the amount of
energy required
to break apart
one mole of a
covalent bond
in the gas state,
measured in
kJ mol–1; also
referred to as
average bond
energy
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
260 CHAPTER 8 STRUCTURE AND PROPERTIES OF ORGANIC COMPOUNDS
Covalent bond
Sufficient energy
to break the bond
A B A B
+∙ ∙
+
Molecule
Atoms
Figure 8A–6 Sufficient energy must be supplied to break a covalent
bond between two atoms.
Table 8A–1 Average bond energies of different types of covalent bonds
Bond Average bond energy (kJ mol–1) Bond Average bond energy (kJ mol–1)
C–H 413 C–F 485
C–C 347 C–Cl 339
C C 614 C–Br 276
C C 839 C–I 240
C–O 358 O–H 467
C O 745 N–H 391
C–N 305 H–H 432
C–S 259 O=O 495
Energy required
to break the
bond
Multiple bonds
require more
energy to break
than single bonds
UNIT 1
LINK
Rather than trying to make sense of individual values in the above table, it is more
important to be able to compare average bond energies of different types of bonds and
draw valid conclusions from the data. For example, the average bond energy of a C–N bond
(305 kJ mol–1) is lower than a C–O bond (358 kJ mol–1). Therefore, we can expect a C–N
bond to be relatively weaker and relatively less stable than a C–O bond.
There are two trends in the average bond energy data above that are worth noting.
• Average bond energy increases as the number of bonds between two atoms
increases. For example, a C C double bond has a higher bond energy than a C–C single
bond. Rationally, the more bonds there are, the more energy is required to break them.
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
Single bond
Double bond Triple bond
Lower bond energy (kJ mol–1)
Weaker bond
Less stable bond
Higher bond energy (kJ mol–1)
Stronger bond
More stable bond
Figure 8A–7 Comparing single, double and triple bond energies
• When an atom is bonded to a series of atoms belonging to the same group, the average
bond energy typically decreases going down the group. For example, the average
bond energy decreases in the order: C–F > C–Cl > C–Br > C–I. This is because as the
atomic radius increases, so does the length of the covalent bond. Longer bonds are
usually weaker bonds and require less energy to break.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
8A STRUCTURAL DIvERSITy IN ORGANIC COMPOUNDS
261
I Br Cl
C C C C
C–I bond
C–Br bond
C–Cl bond
240 kJ mol–1
276 kJ mol–1
339 kJ mol–1
F
C–F bond
485 kJ mol–1
Lower bond energy (kJ mol–1)
Weaker bond
Less stable bond
Higher bond energy (kJ mol–1)
Stronger bond
More stable bond
Figure 8A–8 Comparing carbon–halide bond energies
Check-in questions – Set 1
1 Determine which of the following bonds you expect to be more stable. Justify your
response.
a C–S bond or C–O bond
b C–O bond or C O bond
Representing organic compounds
To effectively communicate organic chemistry to a wide range of audiences, scientists
have devised different ways to represent organic molecules. The most widely used
representations are molecular formula, structural formula, semi-structural formula and
skeletal formula. You have already encountered the first three of these representations in
your previous studies. In this section, we will revise these already familiar representations
and explore the key aspects of the skeletal formula. As you explore each of the following
representations, think about their inherent advantages and disadvantages and the
circumstances in which they are best used.
Molecular and structural formula
The molecular formula represents a list of elements and the number of atoms of each
element in a molecule. The number of atoms is indicated as a subscript following each
chemical symbol. No number is required when there is only one atom of the element.
Carbon (C) always appears as the first element listed, followed by hydrogen (H). All other
elements present are then listed alphabetically. The molecular formula is the simplest
representation of an organic compound. However, its simplicity comes at the cost of not
representing how the atoms are bonded. As a result, the molecular formula is unable to
distinguish between isomers and often omits necessary information about functional
groups within a molecule.
H
O
H
H
H
O C
H C
H
Br
Structural formula
C
C
H C
C
N
H
H C
C
H
H
H
O H
H
H
Cl
H
Molecular formula
C2H4 C2H4O2
C2H5NO C3H5BrCIF
Figure 8A–9 Comparing the structural and molecular formulas of organic compounds
LINK
UNIT 1
LINK
CHAPTER 11
Molecular
formula
the chemical
formula that
gives the total
number of
atoms of each
element within a
compound
H
C F
H
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
262 CHAPTER 8 STRUCTURE AND PROPERTIES OF ORGANIC COMPOUNDS
Structural
formula
a representation
of how the
individual atoms
of the compound
may be arranged
in three-
dimensional
space
Semi-structural
(condensed)
formula
a representation
of organic
molecules
that shows the
order in which
atoms or groups
of atoms are
connected
Alkyl group
a group that is
part of a larger
molecule and is
represented as
an alkane minus
a hydrogen
atom, e.g.
methyl (–CH3)
Parent
hydrocarbon
the longest
continuous
carbon chain in
a molecule
In contrast, the structural formula explicitly shows how all atoms in a molecule are
connected. Every atom is represented by its chemical symbol and bonds are represented by
lines (one line for a single bond and two lines for a double bond). While the structure and
types of functional groups are clearly shown, drawing a structural formula can be tedious
and repetitive. This is especially true for larger molecules where there is a high number of
carbon and hydrogen atoms. Furthermore, showing every hydrogen atom in the molecule
makes the representation unnecessarily large and may direct attention away from the
important features or functional groups within the molecule. Yet, despite these drawbacks,
the structural formula is a necessary representation for students at the beginning of their
organic chemistry training and for scientific communication to the public because it is the
simplest to comprehend.
Semi-structural formula
The semi-structural (or condensed) formula usually omits the bonds within a molecule. While
this representation uses less space than structural formula on paper, it is arguably more
difficult to interpret. This is because it is further removed from the actual shape of the
molecule. A lot of recognisable features of functional groups, including double bonds, are
often condensed and therefore not immediately obvious.
H
H C H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
O
Structural formula
C
C
H C
C
H C
C
C O
H C
C
C
C
H
H
H
O H
H
H
H
H
H
Cl
H
H
H
Semi-structural formula
CH2CH2 CH3COOH CH3CH2CH2OH
CH2ClCH(CH3)CH2CH3
Figure 8A–10 Comparing the structural and semi-structural formulas of organic compounds
Brackets are often used in semi-structural formulas. There are two main reasons why
brackets are used:
• Brackets are used to condense repeating units. In mathematics, we can write the
expression 3 × 3 × 3 × 3 × 3 or we can condense it by using the index notation 35. The
same idea can be applied to semi-structural formulas. For example, a molecule such
as heptane contains five repeating CH2 units in its structure. These CH2 units can be
written in brackets followed by a number in subscript indicating the number of repeats
(e.g. (CH2)5).
• Brackets are used to highlight branched alkyl groups. In any semi-structural formula,
branching alkyl groups need to be distinguished from the main hydrocarbon chain to
avoid ambiguity. For example, 3-methylpentane has a methyl (–CH3) branch on the
third carbon. This methyl group must be written in brackets, so it does not get confused
with the main pentane parent hydrocarbon (e.g. CH3CH(CH3)CH2CH3).
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
CH3CH2CH2CH2CH2CH2CH3 CH3(CH2)5CH3
=
H C
C
C
C
C
C
C H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
Correct Correct
This semi-structure of heptane
This semi-structure of heptane has
has not been condensed but
been condensed by placing all
would still be considered correct.
repeating CH2 units in brackets.
Figure 8A–11 Using brackets to condense multiple repeating units in a semi-structural formula
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
8A STRUCTURAL DIvERSITy IN ORGANIC COMPOUNDS
263
H
H C H
H
H
C
C
C
H
H
H
H
CH3CH2CHCH3CH2CH3 CH3CH2CH(CH3)CH2CH3
Incorrect Correct
Brackets have not been used to
Brackets have been used to indicate
indicate the methyl branch. It can
the methyl branch, which makes it
easily be confused as being part of
easy to distinguish from the parent
the parent hydrocarbon.
hydrocarbon.
Figure 8A–12 Using brackets to highlight branching alkyl groups in a semi-structural formula
H
H C
H
H
C
H
Skeletal formula
a representation
of molecular
structure in
which covalent
bonds are shown
as zigzag lines.
The symbol for
all elements
other than C and
H are always
drawn. Carbon
and hydrogen
are often
omitted
H
C
H
H
C
H
Skeletal formula
The skeletal formula or skeletal representation is a commonly used method to represent
large or complex organic compounds. As shown in Figure 8A–13, it is a concise way to
draw organic compounds using zigzag lines to outline the carbon structure. It might be
helpful to think of skeletal representation as a shorthand version of the structural formula.
Both skeletal and structural formulas use lines to represent bonds. The main difference is
that the skeletal formula does not require the chemical symbols for carbon and hydrogen
to be explicitly written in most cases. This circumvents the repetitive aspects of drawing a
structural formula as discussed on the previous page. The skeletal formula is also quicker to
draw and more space efficient than the structural formula.
H
H C H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
Structural formula
H C
C
C H
H C
C
C
C H
H C
C
C
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
Skeletal formula
Figure 8A–13 Comparing the structural and skeletal formulas of organic compounds
To accurately draw skeletal representations, you need to observe the following conventions.
• Hydrocarbon chains are represented by zigzag lines. It does not matter if the zigzag line
starts upwards or downwards.
• The ends and vertices (points when the line changes direction) represent carbon atoms.
• The lines represent covalent bonds.
• Hydrogen atoms that are bonded to carbons are not drawn. Recall that all carbons
require exactly four bonds. In skeletal representations, it is assumed that all carbons
meet this requirement. Therefore, any carbon showing fewer than four bonds in a
skeletal formula would satisfy its bonding requirement with ‘invisible’ covalent bonds to
hydrogen atoms.
• An alkyl group branched from the parent hydrocarbon points in the same direction as
the vertex.
H
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
264 CHAPTER 8 STRUCTURE AND PROPERTIES OF ORGANIC COMPOUNDS
Figure 8A–14 below shows examples of the conventions from the previous page
being applied.
Hydrocarbon chains
are represented by
zigzag lines
The ends and vertices
of lines represent
carbon atoms
2
4
=
1
3
H
H C
H
H
H
H
C
C
C H
4321
H
H
H
Lines represent bonds
between atoms
Hydrogen atoms that
are bonded to carbons
are not drawn
H
H C H
H
H
H
H
2 4
=
1 3
5
H C
C
C
C
HC
1 2 3 4 5
H
H
H
H
H
Figure 8A–14 Conventions for drawing skeletal formula of alkanes
In addition, the following conventions apply when there is a functional group present in the
molecule:
• Double bonds are shown as two parallel lines.
• All other atoms (O, N, S, F, Cl, Br, I etc.) are represented by their chemical symbols.
• Hydrogen atoms (H) bonded to atoms other than carbon are always shown.
• When necessary, bonds can appear as solid or dashed wedges to indicate three-
dimensional geometry.
NOTE
UNIT 1
LINK
As a reminder from Unit 1, below are the five shapes of molecules determined by VSEPR theory.
H
H
N
O
C
O C O
H H
H H
B
H
H H
H H
H
Linear Bent Trigonal planar Pyramidal Tetrahedral
H
H
N
O C O O
B
H
H C
H
H
H
H
H
H
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
Double bonds are
drawn as two parallel
lines
1
1
Atoms other than C
and H must be
represented using
their chemical symbol
8A STRUCTURAL DIvERSITy IN ORGANIC COMPOUNDS
265
Figure 8A–15 shows examples of the listed conventions being applied.
2
=
3
2
4
=
3
CI
3 1
4 2
Br
=
OH
2
=
1 3
O
3
=
HO
1
2
H
H
C
C
1 2
C H
3
H
H
H
H
H
H
C
C
C
C
H H
1
2
3
4
H
H
H
H
Cl
H
H
H
C
C
Br
1234
H
H H H
H
H
O
H
H C
C
C
H
2
3
H
H
H
H
H
O
C
1 2
C H
3
O
H
H
Figure 8A–15 Conventions for drawing skeletal formula of organic molecules
It is important to be able to recognise the number of implied hydrogens bonded to each
carbon in a skeletal structure. Figure 8A–16 shows the number of hydrogens connected to
each carbon indicated by the number in the boxes.
Hydrogens bonded to
atoms other than C
must be shown
1
C
H
2
3
1
2
0
Br
OH
2 2
0
O
3 3
Figure 8A–16 The number of hydrogens connected to
each carbon in a skeletal representation of a molecule
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
266 CHAPTER 8 STRUCTURE AND PROPERTIES OF ORGANIC COMPOUNDS
Worked example 8A–1 demonstrates a general procedure for converting a structural
formula into its corresponding skeletal representation.
VIDEO
WORKED
EXAMPLE 8A–1
Worked example 8A–1: Drawing a skeletal formula of a molecule from its
structural formula
Draw the following molecule using the skeletal representation.
H
OH
H
H
H
H C
C
C
C
C
1 2 3 4 5
H
H
H
CH3
H
H
Solution
Logic Process
Step 1 Identify and number the longest continuous carbon
chain (parent hydrocarbon). H
H C
H
OH
H
H
H
C
C
C
C
1 2 3 4 5
H
H
CH3
H
H
Step 2 Represent the parent hydrocarbon using zigzag lines
where the ends and vertices represent carbons. 2 4
1 3
5
Step 3 Complete the skeletal representation by drawing any
alkyl side chains and functional groups.
OH
Worked example 8A–2 demonstrates a general procedure for converting a semi-structural
formula into its corresponding skeletal representation.
VIDEO
WORKED
EXAMPLE 8A–2
Worked example 8A–2: Drawing a skeletal formula of a molecule from its
semi-structural formula
Draw the skeletal representation of CH3CHBrCH2CH(CH3)CH2CH3.
Solution
Logic Process
Step 1 Identify and number the longest continuous
carbon chain (parent hydrocarbon). CH3CHBrCH2CH(CH3)CH2CH3
1 2 3 4 5 6
Step 2 Represent the parent hydrocarbon using
zigzag lines where the ends and vertices
represent carbons.
2 4 6
1 3
5
Step 3 Complete the skeletal representation by drawing
any alkyl side chains and functional groups.
Br
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
8A STRUCTURAL DIvERSITy IN ORGANIC COMPOUNDS
267
Check-in questions – Set 2
1 Redraw the structure in your workbook and determine the number of hydrogens
connected to each carbon atom.
O
2 Write the molecular formula of each of the following compounds.
a
Br
b
OH
c NH2
OH
O
3 Draw the skeletal representation of each of the following molecules.
a CH3CH2CH2CH2OH
b CH3CH(CH3)CH2Cl
c CH3CH2CH2CHCH2
d CH3C(CH3)2CH3
4 Write the semi-structural formula of each of the following molecules.
a OH
b Br
c Cl
Structural (constitutional) isomers
Another way in which organic molecules can achieve diversity is by changing the way the
atoms are bonded to each other. In chemistry, compounds that have the same molecular
formula, but different arrangement of atoms and bonds are called structural isomers or
constitutional isomers. As molecules become larger, a greater number of structural isomers
become possible because there are more ways to arrange the atoms and bonds. Figure
8A–17 shows an example of how the atoms and bonds of C4H10 can be arranged in two
different ways to form two isomers.
Structural
isomer
a molecule
with the same
molecular
formula but
different
connectivity
of atoms. Also
referred to as a
constitutional
isomer
Butane Methylpropane
Figure 8A–17 Two structural isomers of C4H10
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
268 CHAPTER 8 STRUCTURE AND PROPERTIES OF ORGANIC COMPOUNDS
Skeletal isomer
a molecule
with the same
molecular
formula but
differing in the
arrangement
of its carbon
structure; also
referred to as a
chain isomer
There are three different types of structural isomers. The first is skeletal isomers or chain
isomers. This is when molecules have the same molecular formula, but different carbon
structures. For example, Figure 8A–18 shows three compounds of C5H12 with different
carbon structures. They represent an example of skeletal isomers.
Positional isomer
a molecule
with the same
molecular
formula
and parent
hydrocarbon
but different
positions of
functional
groups
8C
FUNCTIONAL
GROUPS:
HALOALKANES,
AMINES AND
ALCOHOLS
8D FUNCTIONAL
GROUPS:
ALDEHYDES,
KETONES,
CARBOXYLIC
ACIDS AND
ESTERS
LINK
LINK
Functional group
isomer
a molecule
with the same
molecular
formula
and parent
hydrocarbon but
different types of
functional groups
Pentane 2-methylbutane 2,2-dimethylpropane
Figure 8A–18 Skeletal isomers of C5H12
The second type is positional isomers. This is where molecules have the same molecular
formula but different positions for their functional group(s). Figure 8A–19 shows three
structures of C5H12O with the hydroxyl functional group bonded to different carbons on
each molecule. They represent an example of positional isomers.
OH
HO
OH
Pentan-1-ol Pentan-2-ol Pentan-3-ol
Figure 8A–19 Positional isomers of C5H12O
The third type is called functional group isomers or functional isomers. This is where
molecules have the same molecular formula but different types of functional group.
Figure 8A–20 shows two structures of C4H8O2 where one has a carboxyl functional group
and the other has an ester functional group.
H
H
H
Carboxyl group Ester group
H
H
O
O
H
H
C C
C
C
H C
C
C
O H
O
C H
H
H
H
H
H
H
Figure 8A–20 Functional isomers of C4H8O2
Check-in questions – Set 3
1 Draw a positional isomer of the following alcohol.
OH
2 Draw all four structural isomers of C4H9Br.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
8A STRUCTURAL DIvERSITy IN ORGANIC COMPOUNDS
269
3 Classify the following pairs of molecules as skeletal, positional or functional isomers.
Molecules Type of isomers
a
b Br
Br
c O
OH
8A SKILLS
Distinguishing between structural isomers and identical structures
There are times when the same molecule can be drawn in different perspectives by
either rotating the structure, flipping the structure or drawing bonds at different angles.
The same molecules drawn in different ways are not structural isomers. Table 8A–2
illustrates common cases where two different drawings of the same molecule may be
mistaken as isomers. The skill you may need to practise is being able to identify whether
two molecules, drawn in different ways, are structural isomers or identical structures.
Table 8A–2 Examples of structures that are easily mistaken as structural isomers
VIDEO 8A–1
SKILLS:
DISTINGUISHING
BETWEEN
STRUCTURAL
ISOMERS AND
IDENTICAL
STRUCTURES
Molecular
formula
Structural formulas Explanation
C3H8
H
H
C
H
H
C
H
H
CH
H
CH H
H
HC
H
H
The two structures have
the same arrangement
of atoms and bonds
but are drawn with
different bond angles.
They represent the same
molecule and are not
isomers.
C4H10O
H
OH
H C
H
H
C
H
H
H
H C
H
HO
C
H
H The two molecules may
appear as positional
isomers, but they are
H
the same molecule. The
structure on the left
is drawn as a flipped
version of the structure
on the right. The
hydroxyl group is located
on the same carbon
in both molecules.
Therefore, these two
structures are not
isomers.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
270 CHAPTER 8 STRUCTURE AND PROPERTIES OF ORGANIC COMPOUNDS
C4H10
H
H
C
H
H
CH H
H
C
H
H
CH
H
H
H HC
H
H
C
H
H
Single bonds are free
to rotate so it does not
matter whether the
alkyl group is pointing
up or down. These two
structures are identical
and do not represent
isomers.
Section 8A questions
1 Carbon is an important element in organic chemistry. It has the electron configuration
1s22s22p2
.
a How many covalent bonds does a neutral carbon atom usually form?
b Explain your answer to part a using carbon’s electron configuration.
2 Define ‘average bond energy’.
3 Rank the following from the lowest to highest bond strength.
a C N, C–N, C N
b C–I, C–F, C–Br
4 Carbon can form bonds with many different elements. The average bond energy of C–Si
is 301 kJ mol–1, whereas the average bond energy of C–C is 347 kJ mol–1. Which bond is
more stable? Explain your answer.
5 The average bond energy of C O is 745 k mol–1. Determine the amount of energy
required to completely convert 2.5 mol of CO2(g) into gaseous atoms of C and O.
6 Write the molecular formula of each of the following compounds.
a CH2CHCH2CH2Cl
b C5H12O
7 Draw the skeletal formula of each of the following compounds.
a CH3CHCHCH3
b CH3CHOHCH2CH3
c CH3CH(CH3)CH(CH3)CH2CH3
d CH3(CH2)5CH2Br
e HOOCCH2CH2CH3
8 Write the semi-structural formula of each of the following compounds.
a
b
c
OH
H
H C
H
H
C
O H
9 Draw three isomers of CH3CH2CH2CH2OH using their structural formulas.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
Molecules of carbon
8B
Study Design:
•
The International Union of Pure and Applied
Chemistry (IUPAC) systematic naming of organic
compounds up to C8, with no more than two
functional groups for a molecule, limited to
non-cyclic hydrocarbons, haloalkanes, primary
amines, alcohols (primary, secondary and
tertiary), aldehydes, ketones, carboxylic acids and
non-branched esters
•
Molecular, structural and semi-structural
(condensed) formulas and skeletal structures
of alkanes (including cyclohexane), alkenes,
benzene, haloalkanes, primary amines, primary
amides, alcohols (primary, secondary and
tertiary), aldehydes, ketones, carboxylic acids and
non-branched esters
•
Characteristics of the carbon atom that contribute
to the diversity of organic compounds formed,
with reference to valence electron number,
relative bond strength, relative stability of
carbon bonds with other elements, degree of
unsaturation, and the formation of structural
isomers
ENGAGE
β-Carotene
Carrots, sweet potatoes, pumpkin, mangoes and apricots
are just some of the delicious orange-coloured fruits and
vegetables available from a grocery store. While they taste
vastly different, they all contain the same pigment that
gives them their rich orange colour – β-carotene. This
compound is a hydrocarbon with many C C double bonds.
The electrons in the C C double bonds interact with light,
giving the compound its characteristic colour. The food
industry adds β-carotene to margarine to give it a more
appealing colour.
b-carotene
8B MOLECULES OF CARBON
271
Glossary:
Aromatic compound
Branched isomer
Cyclic alkane
Cycloalkane
Degree of unsaturation
Delocalised electron
Homologous series
Polyunsaturated
Saturated
Straight-chain alkane
Unsaturated
Figure 8B–1 The structure
of β-carotene gives carrots
their characteristic colour.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
272 CHAPTER 8 STRUCTURE AND PROPERTIES OF ORGANIC COMPOUNDS
UNIT 1 LINK
Homologous
series
a sequence of
compounds that
have identical
functional
groups and
similar chemical
properties but
differ by a –CH2–
group in their
structure EXPLAIN
Homologous series
To simplify and organise our study of organic chemistry, we classify organic molecules
into different families. Each family has a characteristic feature or functional group. The
members within a family are organised into a homologous series where each member differs
from the previous one by a –CH2– unit. Table 8B–1 gives a summary of the different
homologous series you have encountered before. All members of the same homologous
series have:
• the same general formula
• similar chemical properties
• a trend for their physical properties that is dependent on their molar mass.
Table 8B–1 Homologous series of different families of molecules
Family Functional group General formula Homologous series
Alkane – CnH2n+2 CH4
C2H6
C3H8
C4H10
…
Alkene C C double bond CnH2n C2H4
C3H6
C4H8
C5H10
…
Chloroalkane Chloro CnH2n+1Cl CH3Cl
C2H5Cl
C3H7Cl
C4H9Cl
…
Alcohol (alkanol) Hydroxyl CnH2n+1OH CH3OH
C2H5OH
C3H7OH
C4H9OH
…
Carboxylic acid Carboxyl CnH2n+1COOH HCOOH
CH3COOH
C2H5COOH
C3H7COOH
…
1A
TYPES OF FUELS
LINK
The rest of this chapter explores the structural features of several different families of
organic compounds, how to name the molecules within them and the trends in their
physical properties.
Hydrocarbons
The most fundamental carbon compounds are the hydrocarbons. These are molecules
made up of only carbon and hydrogen atoms. A combination of these two elements can form
a wide variety of hydrocarbon structures with different physical and chemical properties.
A common source of hydrocarbons in nature is crude oil, which is a natural resource used
for energy generation and production of plastic goods. Hydrocarbon compounds can be
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
8B MOLECULES OF CARBON
273
further classified into different homologous series. This section explores the structural
features and the systematic naming of two of these series: alkanes and alkenes.
Alkanes
Alkanes are saturated hydrocarbons, meaning that only single bonds exist between their
carbon atoms. Alkanes have the general formula Cn
H2n+2. The names and structures of
a homologous series of eight straight-chain alkanes are shown in Table 8B–2. The ‘ane’
component found in all their names indicate that they are alkane molecules. Their molecular
formulas show the incremental increase of a –CH2– unit from one member to the next
within the homologous series. This is a feature that extends to all other homologous series.
Table 8B–2 Name and structure of the first eight straight-chain alkanes
Saturated
an organic
molecule in
which all C–C
bonds are single
bonds
Straight-chain
alkane
an alkane
consisting of
a continuous
chain of carbon
atoms
Number
of carbons
Name Molecular
formula
Semi-structural
formula
Structural formula Skeletal formula
1 Methane CH4 CH4
H
H
C
H
H
H
*
H
H
H
2 Ethane C2H6 CH3CH3
H
H
C
H
H
C
H
H
*
3 Propane C3H8 CH3CH2CH3
H
H
C
H
H
C
H
H
C
H
H
4 Butane C4H10 CH3CH2CH2CH3
H
H
C
H
H
C
H
H
C
H
H
C
H
H
5 Pentane C5H12 CH3(CH2)3CH3
H
H
C
H
H
C
H
H
C
H
H
C
H
H
C H
H
6 Hexane C6H14 CH3(CH2)4CH3
H
H
C
H
H
C
H
H
C
H
H
C
H
H H
C
C
H H
H
7 Heptane C7H16 CH3(CH2)5CH3
H
H
C
H
H
C
H
H
C
H
H
C
H
H H
C
C
H H
H
C
H
H
8 Octane C8H18 CH3(CH2)6CH3
H
H
C
H
H
C
H
H
C
H
H
C
H
H H
C
C
H H
H
C
H
H
C
H
H
* The hydrogens bonded to the carbon are shown in methane for the sake of clarity. The semi-structural formula is more commonly
used to represent small molecules like methane and ethane.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
274 CHAPTER 8 STRUCTURE AND PROPERTIES OF ORGANIC COMPOUNDS
Alkanes larger than C3H8 can form branched isomers. These skeletal isomers of straight-chain
alkanes consist of alkyl groups branching from a parent hydrocarbon. Figure 8B–2 highlights
the alkyl groups and parent hydrocarbon of the same branched-chain alkane using three
different representations.
Branched isomer
a molecule
with the same
molecular formula
but different
arrangement of
alkyl branches
H
H
C
H
H
C
H H
C H H
H
H
H H
C
C
C
C
C
H
H
H
H
H
H
Ethyl group Ethyl
group
H
Parent
hydrocarbon Ethyl
group
H
C
C
H
H
C
H
H
CH3CH2CH2CH(CH2CH3)CH2CH2CH(CH3)CH3
Methyl
group Parent
hydrocarbon
Methyl
group
Parent
hydrocarbon
Methyl
group
Figure 8B–2 A branched alkane involves alkyl groups connected to a main parent hydrocarbon
Alkyl groups have names based on the number of carbon atoms within them. For example,
a –CH3 branch is called a methyl group. The ‘meth’ component refers to one carbon and
the ‘yl’ component indicates that it is an alkyl group. The names of the first four alkyl
groups are listed in Table 8B–3.
Table 8B–3 Names of common alkyl groups
Name Structure
Methyl –CH3
Ethyl –CH2CH3
Propyl –CH2CH2CH3
Butyl –CH2CH2CH2CH3
Nomenclature of alkanes
Names of all organic compounds are guided by a set of rules under the International
Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry (IUPAC) systematic nomenclature. The utility of
this nomenclature system is that the name of a molecule fully describes all aspects of its
structure. A trained person, without using an external reference or database, should be
able to analyse the name of any molecule and be able to draw the correct structure of that
molecule. This naming system allows us to efficiently communicate organic chemistry.
All alkanes can be named using the steps from the flow chart below.
Identify
he parent
hydrocarbon.
Number the carbons on
the parent hydrocarbon
so that any alkyl groups
are assigned the lowest
possible numbers.
Define any alkyl groups
present (methyl, ethyl,
propyl, etc.).
Write the name of the
molecule by placing the
alkyl groups first
followed by the name of
the parent hydrocarbon.
Figure 8B–3 Flow chart showing the general procedure for naming an alkane
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
8B MOLECULES OF CARBON
275
The following rules apply when naming alkanes.
• The parent hydrocarbon is the longest continuous carbon chain.
• The names of all alkanes end in ‘ane’ (Table 8B–2 on page 273).
• The name(s) of the alkyl groups (Table 8B–3) are placed before the parent hydrocarbon
in alphabetical order.
• A number, separated by a hyphen, is used before the alkyl group to represent the
position on the parent hydrocarbon where the alkyl group is bonded.
4
1 7
4-methylheptane
4
1 7
4-ethylheptane
4
1 7
4-propylheptane
• Multipliers ‘di’, ‘tri’ or ‘tetra’ are used for multiple occurrences of the same alkyl group.
The multipliers are not considered for alphabetical ordering.
2,4-dimethylheptane
2,2-dimethylheptane 4-ethyl-2,2-dimethylheptane
• Number the carbons in the parent hydrocarbon from the end that gives the alkyl groups
the lowest possible numbers.
4-methylhexane 3-methylhexane
Incorrect
Consider numbering the parent
hydrocarbon from right to left. This
would give the methyl group a lower
number.
Correct
This is the correct name for the
molecule. The methyl group has been
given the lowest possible number.
• If there is competition for the lower number, the group which is alphabetically first in
the name receives it.
4-ethyl-3-methylhexane 3-ethyl-4-methylhexane
Incorrect
The same set of numbers is achieve by
numbering the molecule from either end.
To break the tie, the group that appears first
(ethyl) should have the lower number.
Correct
This is the correct name for the
molecule.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
276 CHAPTER 8 STRUCTURE AND PROPERTIES OF ORGANIC COMPOUNDS
• Do not use any spaces in the name.
• Use hyphens to separate numbers from words.
• Use commas to separate numbers.
2 3
2,3-dimethyl hexane
2,3 dimethylhexane
2 3-dimethylhexane
2,3-dimethylhexane
VIDEO
WORKED
EXAMPLE 8B–1
Worked example 8B–1: Naming an alkane molecule
Determine the name of the following alkane.
Solution
Logic Process
Step 1 Identify the parent hydrocarbon (longest continuous
carbon chain, as shown in red).
Step 2 Number the parent hydrocarbon so that any alkyl
groups are assigned the lowest possible numbers.
6
5
2
1 3
4
Step 3 Write the name of the parent hydrocarbon. Hexane
Step 4 Identify and name the alkyl groups with their locations. 2-methyl and 4-methyl
Step 5 Write the full name of the molecule by combining the
elements in steps 3 and 4. Alkyl groups appear as
prefixes before the parent hydrocarbon. Don’t forget to
include multipliers if the same alkyl group is present
more than once.
2,4-dimethylhexane
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
Worked example 8B–2: Drawing an alkane with alkyl groups
8B MOLECULES OF CARBON
277
VIDEO
WORKED
EXAMPLE 8B–2
Draw the structural formula of 3-ethyl-3-methylpentane.
Solution
Logic Process
Step 1 Identify the parent hydrocarbon. 3-ethyl-3-methyl pentane
Step 2 Draw the carbon chain of the parent
hydrocarbon. Number the carbons in the chain.
C C C C C
321 54
Step 3 Draw the alkyl groups in the appropriate
locations.
H
C
H
C H
C C C C C
4
321 5
C H
H
Step 4 Draw the rest of the hydrogens on the parent
hydrocarbon.
H
H
C
H
H
C
H
H
C
H
C H
C
C H
H
H
C
H
H
C H
H
Check-in questions – Set 1
d
H
1 Name the following molecules.
a
b CH3(CH2)3CH(CH3)CH2CH3
c
H
C
H
2 Write the semi-structural formula of the following molecules.
a heptane
b 3-ethylpentane
c 2,2-dimethylpentane
H
C H
C
H
H
C
C H
H
H
C
H
H
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
278 CHAPTER 8 STRUCTURE AND PROPERTIES OF ORGANIC COMPOUNDS
Alkenes
Alkenes are unsaturated hydrocarbons characterised by the presence of one or more
C C double bond(s). Alkenes with a single C C double bond belong in the same
homologous series. The smallest member of this homologous series is ethene. The names
and structures of the first seven straight-chain alk-1-enes are shown in Table 8B–4. The
general formula for alkenes with one C C double bond is Cn
H2n
.
Table 8B–4 Formulas of the first seven straight-chain alkanes
Number
of carbons
Name Molecular
formula
Semi-structural
formula
Structural formula Skeletal formula
2 Ethene C2H4 CH2CH2
H
H
C
C
H
H
3 Propene C3H6 CH2CHCH3
H
H
C
C
H
H
C H
H
4 But-1-ene C4H8 CH2CHCH2CH3
H
H
C
C
H
H
H
C C H
H
H
5 Pent-1-ene C5H10 CH2CHCH2CH2CH3
H
H
H
C
C
C C
H
H
H
C
H
H
C H
H
6 Hex-1-ene C6H12 CH2CH(CH2)3CH3
H
H
H
C
C
C C
H
H
H
C
H
H
H
C H
H
H
H
7 Hept-1-ene C7H14 CH2CH(CH2)4CH3 H
H
C
C C
H
H
H
H
C
H
H
H
C C
H
H
H
C
H
H
8 Oct-1-ene C8H16 CH2CH(CH2)5CH3
H
H
C
C
H
H
C
H
H
C
H
H
C
H
H
H
C C
H
H
H
C
H
H
UNIT 1
LINK
Alkenes are an important family of organic molecules. Alkenes are used to produce
important plastics that we commonly use daily. For example, ethene is used to produce
polyethylene (polyethene), the polymer used to make milk bottles, plastic cling wrap, plastic
bags, plastic bottles and many other common objects (Figure 8B–4).
Figure 8B–4 Common household objects made from polyethene, a polymer of ethene
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
8B MOLECULES OF CARBON
279
Nomenclature of alkenes
Like alkanes, straight chain alkenes use the same naming system based on the number of
carbon atoms in the longest continuous chain as the parent hydrocarbon. Names of all
alkenes end in ‘ene’ instead of ‘ane’ as for alkanes. The location of the C C double bond
needs to be specified in the name for alkenes larger than C3H6 due to possible isomers.
Follow the general flow chart when naming alkenes (Figure 8B–5).
Identify the parent
hydrocarbon. The C=C
double bond must be part
of the parent hydrocarbon.
Number the carbons on
the parent hydrocarbon
starting from the end
closest to the C=C bond.
Define any alkyl groups
present (methyl, ethyl,
propyl, etc.).
Figure 8B–5 Flow chart showing the general procedure for naming alkenes
Write the name of the
molecule by placing the
alkyl groups first,
followed by the name of
the parent hydrocarbon.
In addition to the rules for alkanes, the following rules may need to be applied when
naming alkenes.
• Include the C C double bond in the longest continuous carbon chain (parent
hydrocarbon).
• Number the chain starting from the end closest to the C C double bond. This ensures
that the C C double bond is assigned the lowest possible number.
• If positional isomers are possible, use numbers to indicate the first carbon of the C C
double bond.
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
C C
C
H
H C C
C
C
H
H C C
C
C
C H
H
H
H
H H
H
Propene But-1-ene Pent-2-ene
• If the C C double bond is equidistant to both ends of the parent hydrocarbon, assign
any alkyl group(s) the lowest possible number(s).
5-methylhex-3-ene 2-methylhex-3-ene
Incorrect
Consider numbering the parent
hydrocarbon from right to left. This
would give the methyl group a lower
number.
Correct
This is the correct name for the
molecule. The methyl group has been
given the lowest possible number.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
280 CHAPTER 8 STRUCTURE AND PROPERTIES OF ORGANIC COMPOUNDS
Check-in questions – Set 2
1 Write the name of each of the following molecules.
a
d
b CH3CHCHCH(CH3)CH2CH3
c CH2C(CH3)CH2CH3
H
H H
C
H C H
H
H
H C
C C
C
H
H
H
H
2 Draw the skeletal structure of each of the following molecules.
a hex-3-ene
b 4-methylpent-1-ene
c 2,3-dimethylbut-2-ene
Cyclic alkane or
cycloalkane
a molecule
with one or
more rings
of saturated
carbons in its
structure
Cyclic hydrocarbons
Cyclohexane
Hydrocarbons can also adopt a cyclic or ring structure. Imagine a hexane molecule with
an extra covalent bond connecting the first and last carbon atoms. Consequently, each of
these carbons need to lose a hydrogen atom to maintain exactly four bonds. This molecule
is called cyclohexane (C6H12) and is shown in Figure 8B–6. The ‘cyclo’ part of the name
indicates a cyclic structure. The second part of the name describes the total number of
carbons in the ring structure. Many other cyclic alkanes or cycloalkanes exist in nature or
can be synthesised by chemists. These include cyclopropane (the smallest possible cyclic
alkane), cyclobutane, cyclopentane, cyclooctane etc. Even though cyclohexane (C6H12) and
hexane (C6H14) are both saturated molecules with six carbon atoms, they are not structural
isomers because they have different molecular formulas. In fact, cycloalkanes are a separate
homologous series from straight-chain alkanes.
Cyclohexane Cyclopropane Cyclobutane Cyclopentane Cyclooctane
Cycloheptane
Figure 8B–6 Structures of cyclohexane and other members of the cycloalkane family
Benzene
Another cyclic hydrocarbon deserving a particular mention is benzene (C6H6), a molecule
commonly found in petrochemicals. Its structure, as shown in Figure 8B–7, shares
similarities with cyclohexane but each carbon atom is bonded to only one hydrogen atom.
All six carbon atoms in benzene adopt a trigonal planar geometry, resulting in the entire
molecule being planar or flat. This makes each carbon in benzene appear to only have
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
8B MOLECULES OF CARBON
281
three bonds. In fact, the last valance electron from each of the 6 carbon atoms form rings
of delocalised electrons above and below the molecule. Benzene is often represented as a
hexagon with a circle in the middle. This circle represents the delocalised electron ring.
Ring of delocalised electrons
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H H
Figure 8B–7 Representations of benzene
Other representations of benzene include three alternating double bonds around a hexagon.
While this is a less accurate representation of benzene, it does help us conceptualise the
‘location’ of the electrons around the cyclic molecule. This becomes useful when we need to
explain how benzene and other similar molecules react in chemical reactions.
Delocalised
electron
an electron
that is not
associated with
any particular
atom and is free
to move
Figure 8B–8 Alternative representations of benzene
It should be noted that the ring of delocalised electrons gives benzene extra stability
compared to a typical alkene. Benzene and many other planar cyclic compounds with a
ring of delocalised electrons belong to a class of compounds called aromatic compounds
(Figure 8B–9). These compounds have a wide variety of uses, including therapeutics, dyes
and plastics.
Aromatic
compound
a cyclic
molecule
with a ring of
delocalised
electrons
LINK
DOC
Benzene Toluene Naphthalene Phenanthrene Anthracene
Figure 8B–9 Structures of benzene and other aromatic compounds
12A
ORGANIC
COMPOUNDS AS
MEDICINES
WORKSHEET
8B–1
NAMING
ALKANES AND
ALKENES
Degree of unsaturation
Molecules with at least one double bond (or triple bond) are described as unsaturated. The
word ‘unsaturated’ is associated with the idea that the molecule is ‘not full’. This is because
one of the bonds from the double bond can break allowing the molecule to form new
bonds to more atoms. For example, adding two hydrogen atoms to a molecule of but-1-ene
gives the product butane, as shown in Figure 8B–10. In contrast to but-1-ene, butane does
not have any double bonds. Therefore, it is considered saturated or ‘full’ because no more
addition of atoms is possible. To extend on this idea, molecules with more than one double
Unsaturated
a molecule that
has one or more
C C double
bonds or C C
triple bonds
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
282 CHAPTER 8 STRUCTURE AND PROPERTIES OF ORGANIC COMPOUNDS
Polyunsaturated
an organic
compound that
has two or more
C C double
bonds or C C
triple bonds
Degree of
unsaturation
a calculation
of the number
of ring systems
and double
bonds (and triple
bonds) in a
molecule; can be
shortened to DoU
bond are considered to have a higher degree of unsaturation because a greater number of H
atoms could be added to them. Molecules with a higher degree of unsaturation are referred
to as polyunsaturated. This leads to the idea that different molecules have a different degree
of unsaturation (DoU).
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H C
C H H
C H
C
+
H C
C
C H
C
H
H
H
H
H
H
Figure 8B–10 Addition of hydrogen (H2) to unsaturated but-1-ene gives the saturated product butane.
Counting the bonds
The degree of unsaturation of a molecule can be quantified by its total number of double
bonds, triple bonds and cyclic structures. If the molecule’s structure is known, we can
determine the degree of unsaturation by simply counting the number of double bonds,
triple bonds or cyclic structures that appear in the molecule. It is important to note that
double bonds and triple bonds are not limited to C
C double bonds or C C triple bonds.
A C
O would qualify as a double bond.
The following formula summarises this process. While triple bonds do affect the degree of
unsaturation, they are not part of this Study Design and therefore have been excluded from
this version of the formula.
Degree of unsaturation (DoU) = number of double bonds + number of cyclic structures
The following examples demonstrate how this equation can be applied to different
circumstances.
VIDEO
WORKED
EXAMPLE 8B–3
Worked example 8B–3: Determining the degree of unsaturation by counting
the bonds (1)
Determine the degree of unsaturation of the following alkene.
Solution
Logic Process
Step 1 Circle or highlight all double bonds
and cyclic structures.
Step 2 Apply the number of double bonds and
cyclic structures to the DoU equation.
DoU = double bonds + cyclic structure
DoU = 2 + 0
Step 3 Solve the equation. DoU = 2
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
Worked example 8B–4: Determining the degree of unsaturation by counting
the bonds (2)
8B MOLECULES OF CARBON
283
VIDEO
WORKED
EXAMPLE 8B–4
Determine the degree of unsaturation of the following molecule.
O
Solution
Logic Process
Step 1 Circle or highlight all double bonds
and cyclic structures.
O
Step 2 Apply the number of double bonds and
cyclic structures to the DoU equation.
DoU = double bonds + cyclic structure
DoU = 2 + 1
Step 3 Solve the equation. DoU = 3
Worked example 8B–5: Determining the degree of unsaturation by counting
the bonds (3)
VIDEO
WORKED
EXAMPLE 8B–5
Determine the degree of unsaturation of benzene.
Solution
Logic Process
Step 1 Circle or highlight all double bonds
and cyclic structures.
Step 2 Apply the number of double bonds
and cyclic structures to the DoU
equation.
DoU = 3 + 1
Step 3 Solve the equation. DoU = 4
Using the molecular formula
The degree of unsaturation can also be determined using the molecular formula of a
compound. The following equation applies when the molecular formula is known:
DoU = 2 2
C N H X
2
where:
C = The number of carbon atoms
N = The number of nitrogen atoms
H = The number of hydrogen atoms
X = The number of halogen atoms (F, Cl, Br, I).
The following worked examples demonstrate how this equation can be applied to different
circumstances.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
284 CHAPTER 8 STRUCTURE AND PROPERTIES OF ORGANIC COMPOUNDS
VIDEO
WORKED
EXAMPLE 8B–6
Worked example 8B–6: Determining the degree of unsaturation using
the molecular formula (1)
Calculate the degree of unsaturation of a compound with the molecular formula C4H6.
Solution
Logic Process
Step 1 Analyse the molecular formula for the terms that
appear in the DoU equation.
C = 4 (4 carbon atoms)
N = 0 (no nitrogen atoms)
H = 6 (6 hydrogen atoms)
X = 0 (no halogen atoms)
Step 2 Substitute the terms in the DoU equation for
their respective numbers. DoU = 2 × 4 + 2 + 0 – 6 – 0
2
Step 3 Solve the equation. DoU = 2
VIDEO
WORKED
EXAMPLE 8B–7
Worked example 8B–7: Determining the degree of unsaturation using the
molecular formula (2)
Calculate the degree of unsaturation for the amino acid tyrosine, C9H11NO3.
Solution
Logic Process
Step 1 Analyse the molecular formula for the terms that
appear in the DoU equation.
C = 9
N = 1
H = 11
X = 0
Step 2 Substitute the terms in the DoU equation for
their respective numbers. DoU = 2 × 9 + 2 + 1 – 11 – 0
2
Step 3 Solve the equation. DoU = 5
WORKSHEET
8B–2
CALCULATING
DEGREE OF
UNSATURATION
DOC
Check-in questions − Set 3
1 Calculate the degree of unsaturation in the following molecules.
a C5H8
b C7H14O
c C5H9NO4
2 Determine the degree of unsaturation for benzaldehyde (shown below).
O
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
8B MOLECULES OF CARBON
285
8B SKILLS
VIDEO 8B–1
SKILLS: NAMING
ORGANIC
MOLECULES
Naming organic molecules
The ability to rectify incorrect molecule names is a skill that shows your proficiency
in applying the IUPAC rules that govern how molecules are named. Not following
the exact rules for naming organic molecules may lead you to come up with incorrect
names. For example, the name 2,3-diethylbutane is an incorrect name for the structure
that it represents.
Question: Draw the structure of 2,3-diethylbutane, state the reason why it is incorrectly
named and write the correct name of the molecule.
Solution: Draw a skeletal diagram of 2,3-diethylbutane.
2 4
1
3
2,3-diethylbutane
Reason: The parent hydrocarbon was not correctly identified because it was not the
longest continuous carbon chain. The correct numbering system is shown below.
1
2
3
4
5
6
Correct name: 2,3-dimethylhexane
Individually, construct a similar type of question and model solution. Once complete,
swap your question with a friend and turn this naming activity into a revision game.
Section 8B questions
1 Write the IUPAC names of the following molecules.
a
b
H
H C
H
C
H C
H
H
H
H
C
H
H
C
H
H H
C
H
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
286 CHAPTER 8 STRUCTURE AND PROPERTIES OF ORGANIC COMPOUNDS
c
H
H
H
H
H C
C
C
C
C H
H H
C
H H
H
H
d
e CH3(CH2)3CHC(CH3)2
2 Draw the structural formula of each of the following hydrocarbons.
a 2-methylbutane
b 2,4-dimethylpentane
c 4-ethylhex-2-ene
d 3,3-dimethylhex-1-ene
3 Which two compounds in Question 2 are structural isomers?
4 Define ‘homologous series’.
5 Using the skeletal formula, draw and name the structures of the following molecules.
a a saturated straight-chain hydrocarbon with five carbon atoms
b a branched alkane with four carbon atoms
c an unsaturated hydrocarbon with three carbon atoms
d two isomers of hex-1-ene, each having two alkyl groups
6 Calculate the degree of unsaturation of the following molecules.
a C10H16
b C6H10
c C2F6
d C6H9Cl2NO
e C5H5NO3
7 Determine the degree of unsaturation of the following molecules from their structures.
a
b
O
c
d CH2CHCH2CH2CH3
e CH3CH2CHC(CH3)CH2CHCHCH3
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
8C
8C FUNCTIONAL GROUPS: HALOALKANES, AMINES AND ALCOHOLS
287
Functional groups: haloalkanes,
amines and alcohols
Study Design:
•
The International Union of Pure and
Applied Chemistry (IUPAC) systematic
naming of organic compounds up to C8,
with no more than two functional groups
for a molecule, limited to non-cyclic
hydrocarbons, haloalkanes, primary amines,
alcohols (primary, secondary and tertiary),
aldehydes, ketones, carboxylic acids and
non-branched esters
•
Molecular, structural and semi-
structural (condensed) formulas and
skeletal structures of alkanes (including
cyclohexane), alkenes, benzene,
haloalkanes, primary amines, primary
amides, alcohols (primary, secondary and
tertiary), aldehydes, ketones, carboxylic
acids and non-branched esters
Glossary:
Alcohol
Alkanol
Amine
Amino functional group
Haloalkane
Hydroxyl group
Primary alcohol (1o alcohol)
Secondary alcohol (2o alcohol)
Tertiary alcohol (3o alcohol)
ENGAGE
Grain alcohol and wood alcohol
Alcohols such as methanol and ethanol are widely produced for their industrial and
commercial significance. Methanol (also called wood alcohol because once upon a
time it was produced by heating wood in the absence of oxygen) is highly toxic when
consumed. Ingesting even a small amount of methanol can lead to blindness, organ
failure and death. Illegally sourced alcohol (bootleg alcohol) can sometimes contain
traces of methanol, which can cause severe harm if consumed.
In contrast, ethanol is a component of many alcoholic beverages. It is produced by
fermentation of the glucose in grapes, potato, corn, rye, wheat and various other grains.
It is given the name ‘grain alcohol’ because of its production method. The type of plant
species used for the fermentation determines the type of beverage (red wine, white wine,
beer, whiskey or bourbon etc.) produced (Figure 8C–1). While ethanol does not have the
same severe effects as methanol, excess consumption can lead to loss of coordination,
lowered inhibition, nausea, headache and loss
of consciousness.
The ethanol content of alcoholic beverages is
usually taxed by governments, making ethanol
an expensive substance. However, because it
is also an important substance for research
and industry, any ethanol not intended for
consumption is not taxed. This source of
ethanol is often denatured, meaning that it
is made undrinkable by mixing it with small
quantities of methanol or other substances.
Figure 8C–1 Barley grains are fermented
to produce beer.
LINK
1B
PRODUCTION
OF CHEMICAL
ENERGY IN
NATURE
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
288 CHAPTER 8 STRUCTURE AND PROPERTIES OF ORGANIC COMPOUNDS
8A STRUCTURAL
DIVERSITY
IN ORGANIC
COMPOUNDS
Chloroalkane
Bromoalkane
H
H
C C
H
H
H
EXPLAIN
LINK
What are functional groups?
As we saw earlier in Section 8A, a way to achieve molecular diversity is by changing
the elements bonded to the carbon chain in an organic molecule. Imagine substituting
a hydrogen atom in an alkane with another atom or group of atoms. This modification
generates a new derivative of the original alkane. For example, substituting a hydrogen
on an alkane for a chlorine gives a chloroalkane (Figure 8C–2). Similarly, substituting a
hydrogen on an alkane for a hydroxyl (–OH) group gives an alcohol.
Alkane Molecules containing functional groups
H
Cl
H
C C
H
H
H
H
Br
H
C C
H
H
H
H
H
OH
H
C C
H
Alcohol
H
H
H
NH2
H
C C
H
Amine
H
H
Figure 8C–2 Substituting a hydrogen on an alkane for other elements
introduces functional groups to the molecule.
A functional group is a specific atom or group of atoms within a molecule that gives
the molecule its own characteristic properties. In Figure 8C–2, the newly introduced
atom or group of atoms are the functional groups of the molecules. Importantly, organic
compounds are organised into families based on the type of functional group they possess.
All molecules within the same family have the same functional group and exhibit similar
chemical properties. For example, the molecules shown in Figure 8C–3 all have a chloro-
functional group. Despite having a different number of carbon atoms, their identical
functional group means that they have similar chemical properties. A chemist can expect
that they would all behave in a very similar manner during a reaction. The organisation of
organic compounds into families allows chemists to make predictions and generalisations
about molecules they have never encountered before.
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
Cl
C H
Cl
C C
H
Cl
C C
C H
Cl
C C
C
C H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
Figure 8C–3 A homologous series of chloroalkanes has identical functional groups and very similar
chemical properties. They would all behave in a similar manner during a chemical reaction.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
8C FUNCTIONAL GROUPS: HALOALKANES, AMINES AND ALCOHOLS
289
This section explores the structural features and nomenclature of molecules bearing the
following functional groups:
• halo functional group (a fluoro-, chloro-, bromo- or iodo- functional group)
• hydroxyl functional group
• amino functional group.
Haloalkanes
Haloalkanes are a family of molecules in which one or more of the hydrogens in an alkane
is substituted for a halogen atom (F, Cl, Br or I). Each of the halogen atoms is given its own
name when it is bonded to a molecule. These names are derived by removing the ‘ine’ from
its elemental name and replacing it with an ‘o’. So, a fluorine atom in an organic molecule
would be called a fluoro- functional group. The other groups are called chloro-, bromo-
and iodo- (Figure 8C–4). The term ‘halo functional group’ is sometimes used to refer
to them collectively.
Haloalkane
an alkane in
which one or
more halogen
atoms has
replaced a
hydrogen atom
or atoms
Fluoro group Chloro group Bromo group Iodo group
F
Cl
Br
I
H
C H
H
C H
H
C H
H
C H
H
H
H
H
CH3F
fluoromethane
CH3Cl CH3Br CH3I
chloromethane bromomethane iodomethane
Figure 8C–4 Structures and functional groups of various halomethanes
Haloalkanes are found in a range of applications, including flame retardants, refrigerants,
aerosols, solvents, pesticides and pharmaceuticals. Some haloalkanes have adverse effects
on our environment. One example is Freon™, a commercial product consisting of a
mixture of haloalkanes used in refrigeration, air conditioning and aerosol propellants.
Unfortunately, Freon™ also causes ozone depletion and has been phased out of use.
LINK
12A
ORGANIC
COMPOUNDS AS
MEDICINES
Figure 8C–5 Haloalkanes traditionally used as aerosol propellants depleted the ozone layer in
our atmosphere.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
290 CHAPTER 8 STRUCTURE AND PROPERTIES OF ORGANIC COMPOUNDS
Nomenclature of haloalkanes
When naming haloalkanes, it is important to include the halogen atom in the longest
parent hydrocarbon. Apply all the rules for naming alkanes along with the following
additional rules specific to haloalkanes.
• The name of the halo functional group appears before the name of the parent
hydrocarbon.
Br
H
H
C
HC
H
I
C
H
C
H
H
H
H
H
bromoethane iodoethane
• If positional isomers are possible, use numbers to indicate the carbon to which the halo
group is bonded.
• Assign the lowest possible number to the halo group. This involves numbering the
parent hydrocarbon starting from the end closest to the functional group.
H
H
Cl
H
C
C
C
H
H
H H
chloropropane
3-chloropropane 1-chloropropane
Incorrect
Positional isomers are possible
in this molecule. The name
needs to specify the position of
the functional group.
Incorrect
The chloro group has not been
assigned the lowest possible
number. Start numbering the
parent hydrocarbon from the
end closest to the chloro group.
Correct
This is the correct name for the
molecule.
• Use prefixes ‘di’, ‘tri’ and ‘tetra’ if two, three or four, respectively, identical halo functional
groups are present.
• Order the name alphabetically if more than one type of halo functional group is present
or if an alkyl group is present.
H
H F
H
H
C
C
C
C
H
H
H F
H
2-fluoro-2-fluorobutane
2-difluorobutane 2,2-difluorobutane
Incorrect
The two identical functional
groups are condensed by
using ‘di’ before the name.
Incorrect
The position of both fluoro
groups needs to be specified in
the name even if they are on
the same carbon.
Correct
This is the correct name for the
molecule.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
8C FUNCTIONAL GROUPS: HALOALKANES, AMINES AND ALCOHOLS
291
• In the case where there is a tie
between two halo functional
groups, the one that appears
first (alphabetically) will get
the lower number.
Br
H H
H
H
Cl
H
C
C
C
C
C
C
H
H
H H
H
H
H
6-bromo-1-chlorohexane 1-bromo-6-chlorohexane
Incorrect
Numbering the molecule from either end
results in a tie-break between the bromo
and the chloro groups getting the lower
number (1 and 6). In this case, the bromo
group, which appears first in the name,
gets the lower of the two numbers.
Correct
This is the correct name for the
molecule.
Worked example 8C–1: Drawing the skeletal formula of a haloalkane
VIDEO
WORKED
EXAMPLE 8C–1
Draw the structure of 2-fluoro-3-methylpentane using the skeletal formula.
Solution
Logic Process
Step 1 Identify the parent hydrocarbon. 2-fluoro-3-methylpentane
Step 2 Draw and number the parent hydrocarbon.
2 4
1 5
3
Step 3 Draw the halo functional group in the location
outlined by the name.
F
2 4
1 5
3
2-fluoro-3-methylpentane
Step 4 Draw the alkyl group in the location outlined by
the name.
F
2-fluoro-3-methylpentane 2-fluoro-3-methylpentane
Check-in questions – Set 1
1 Write the systematic name of the following haloalkanes.
a CH3CH2CHBrCH3
c
Cl
b
CI
Cl
C H
H
Br
2 Draw the following molecules using the skeletal formula.
a 2-bromobutane
b 1-chloro-1-fluoroethane
c 2,2-dibromo-1-chloropropane
d 1-fluoro-2-methylbutane
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
Hydroxyl group
a functional
group
characterised by
–OH bonded to a
carbon atom
Alkanol
an alkane in
which a hydroxyl
group (–OH)
has replaced a
hydrogen atom
Alcohol
a family
of organic
compounds
characterised by
a hydroxyl (–OH)
functional group
H
292 CHAPTER 8 STRUCTURE AND PROPERTIES OF ORGANIC COMPOUNDS
Alcohols
Substituting a hydrogen of an alkane for a hydroxyl group (–OH) gives an alkanol or alcohol.
For simplicity, the terms ‘alkanol’ and ‘alcohol’ are often used interchangeably. In a strict
sense, ‘alcohol’ is a broader term referring to any molecule with a hydroxyl functional
group, whereas ‘alkanol’ refers to saturated molecules bearing a hydroxyl group. The first
three members of the alkanol homologous series are shown in Figure 8C–6.
Hydroxyl functional group
H
H
H
H
H
C
O
H C
O
CH
C
O
H
H
H
H
H
H
CH3OH
CH3CH2OH
CH3CH2CH2OH
Methanol
Ethanol
Propan-1-ol
Figure 8C–6 First three members of the alkanol homologous series
Hydroxyl groups are polar functional groups due to oxygen having a higher electronegativity
than its neighbouring atoms and the V-shaped bond arrangement around the oxygen atom.
The two lone pairs on the oxygen atom are significant features because they allow the
formation of intermolecular hydrogen bonds with another molecule (Figure 8C–7).
Hydrogen bond
H
H
CO
δ–
H
H
δ+
H
H
C
O
δ–
H
H
δ+
Figure 8C–7 Hydrogen bonding between
two molecules of methanol
Primary alcohol
(1° alcohol)
an alcohol
molecule in
which the
carbon bonded
to the hydroxyl
group is also
bonded to
(at most) one
alkyl group
Secondary
alcohol
(2° alcohol)
an alcohol
molecule in
which the
carbon bonded
to the hydroxyl
group is also
bonded to two
alkyl groups
Tertiary alcohol
(3° alcohol)
an alcohol
molecule in
which the
carbon bonded
to the hydroxyl
group is also
bonded to three
alkyl groups
Types of alcohols
Alcohols can be further divided into three different types based on the structure of their
carbon chain. The names of these three different types are:
• primary alcohol (1° alcohol)
• secondary alcohol (2° alcohol)
• tertiary alcohol (3° alcohol).
In a primary alcohol, the carbon bonded to the hydroxyl group has, at most, one alkyl group
attached to it. An alkyl group (denoted by the symbol R) refers to any hydrocarbon chain.
In a secondary alcohol, the hydroxyl carbon has two alkyl groups attached to it. In a tertiary
alcohol, the hydroxyl carbon has three alkyl groups attached to it. Table 8C–1 shows these
structural features along with examples of each type of alcohol.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
8C FUNCTIONAL GROUPS: HALOALKANES, AMINES AND ALCOHOLS
Table 8C–1 Definition and examples of the three different types of alcohols
293
Alcohol type Definition Examples
Primary alcohol
(1° alcohol)
H
In a primary
C
O
alcohol, the carbon
R CH
H
bonded to the
H
hydroxyl group
is bonded to (at
most) one other
alkyl group.
H
H
H
C
H
O
H
H
CH
H
O
H
Secondary alcohol
(2° alcohol)
CR
R
H
O
In a secondary
alcohol, the carbon
bonded to the
H CH
hydroxyl group
is bonded to two
other alkyl groups.
H
H
H
HO
C HC
H
H
H
C
H
H
HO
C
C
H C
H
HC
H
H H H
Tertiary alcohol
(3° alcohol)
R
R
C
R
O
H
In a tertiary alcohol,
the carbon bonded
to the hydroxyl
group is bonded
to three other
alkyl groups.
H
CH
H
H
HO
C HC
C
H
H H H
CH
H
H
OH
C
C
H C
H
H
HC
H
H H H
Check-in questions – Set 2
1 Label the following alcohols as primary, secondary or tertiary.
Structure Type of alcohol
H
H
C
H
H
C
O
H
C
H
H
H
CH3CHOHCH2CH2CH3
OH
OH
2 Draw the structural formula of a tertiary alcohol with the molecular formula C4H10O.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
294 CHAPTER 8 STRUCTURE AND PROPERTIES OF ORGANIC COMPOUNDS
Nomenclature of alcohols
When naming an alcohol, it is important to first identify the longest parent hydrocarbon
containing the hydroxyl group. Apply all the rules for naming alkanes along with the
following additional rules specific to alcohols.
• The names of alcohols derived from alkanes are constructed by replacing the final ‘e’
in the name of the alkane with ‘ol’. For example, the alcohol derived from methane is
called methanol.
H
H
H
C
O
H C
O
H
H
H
H
methanol
ethanol
• If positional isomers are possible, the location of the hydroxyl group must be specified in
the name. This is done using a number, separated by hyphens, before the ‘ol’ part of the
name. The number indicates the carbon to which the hydroxyl group is bonded.
H
H
CH
C
H
H
O
H
H
propanol propan-2-ol
Incorrect
Positional isomers are possible in
this molecule. The name needs to
specify the position of the functional
group.
Correct
This is the correct name for the
molecule. There are positional
isomers possible so the name needs
to differentiate propan-2-ol from
propan-1-ol.
• The parent hydrocarbon is numbered from the end closest to the hydroxyl group. This
ensures that the hydroxyl group carbon is assigned the lowest possible number.
OH
2-methylheptan-5-ol 6-methylheptan-3-ol
Incorrect
The hydroxyl group takes priority
and should be given the lowest
possible number.
Correct
This is the correct name for the
molecule. The molecule is
numbered starting from the end
closest to the hydroxyl group.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
Worked example 8C–2: Drawing the skeletal formula of an alcohol
8C FUNCTIONAL GROUPS: HALOALKANES, AMINES AND ALCOHOLS
295
VIDEO
WORKED
EXAMPLE 8C–2
Draw the structure of 2,5-dimethylhexan-1-ol using the skeletal formula.
Solution
Logic Process
Step 1 Identify and draw the parent hydrocarbon.
Step 2 Number the parent hydrocarbon.
2,5-dimethylhexan-1-ol
2,5-Dimethylhexan-1-ol
2 4
1
6
3 5
Step 3 Draw the hydroxyl functional group in the location
outlined by the name.
HO
2 4
1
3 5
2,5-dimethylhexan-1-ol
2,5-Dimethylhexan-1-ol
6
Step 4 Draw any alkyl groups in the location outlined by
the name.
HO
2,5-dimethylhexan-1-ol
2,5-dimethylhexan-1-ol
Check-in questions – Set 3
1 Draw the following molecules using the structural formula.
a pentan-3-ol
b 3-ethylhexan-1-ol
c 2,2-dimethylpropan-1-ol
2 Write the systematic name of the following alkanols.
a CH2OHCH2CH2CH3
b CH3CH2CH(CH2CH3)CH2CH2OH
c CH3(CH2)3CHOHCH2CH3
Primary amines
Substituting a hydrogen of an alkane for an amino functional group (–NH2) gives an amine.
Amines are another family of organic molecules. Amines are commonly found in household
cleaning products, paints, dyes and various pharmaceutical products. The structure of the
first three members of the amine homologous series is shown in Figure 8C–8 below. The
scope of this course is limited to only primary amines.
Amino functional group
H
H
H
H
H
H
CH
N
H C
N
CH
C
N
H
H
H
H
H
H
CH3NH2
CH3CH2NH2
CH3CH2CH2NH2
methanamine
ethanamine
propan-1-amine
Figure 8C–8 First three members of the primary amine homologous series
LINK
12A
ORGANIC
COMPOUNDS AS
MEDICINES
H
H
Amino functional
group
a functional
group consisting
of –NH2
Amine
a family
of organic
compounds
characterised by
an amino (–NH2)
functional group
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
296 CHAPTER 8 STRUCTURE AND PROPERTIES OF ORGANIC COMPOUNDS
The amino group adopts a trigonal pyramidal shape due to the lone pair of electrons on the
nitrogen atom. This makes the amino group a polar functional group. Like hydroxyl groups,
the lone pair on the nitrogen can form an intermolecular hydrogen bond with a hydrogen
of another amino group.
H
H
δ+
H
H
CO
δ–
H
H
δ+
H
CH
H
δ–
CN
H
O
δ–
H
δ+
H
Hydrogen bond
UNIT 2
LINK
H
δ+
H
H
C
δ–
N
H
δ+
H
H
δ+
Figure 8C–9 Intermolecular hydrogen bonding between
two primary amines and between two primary alcohols
The amino group is an alkaline or basic functional group. This means that an aqueous
solution of an amine has a pH greater than 7 at 25oC. In an acid–base reaction, the amino
group accepts a hydrogen (H+) ion to give an –NH3
+ group (called an ammonium group).
Alkyl ammoniums and amines are conjugate acid–base pairs.
+ +
NH2 H2O(l) OH–(aq)
NH3
+
Figure 8C–10 Propan-1-amine acting as a base in a reaction with H2O
Nomenclature of primary amines
The nomenclature rules that apply to primary amines are very similar to those of alcohols
mentioned previously. The first step is always to identify the longest continuous carbon chain
with the amino functional group. The rules specific to primary amines are summarised below.
• The names of primary amines derived from alkanes are constructed by replacing the
final ‘e’ in the name of the alkane with ‘amine’. For example, the primary amine derived
from methane is called methanamine.
H
H
H
H
CH
N
H C
N
H
H
H
H
methanamine
ethanamine
• If positional isomers are possible, the location of the amino group must be specified in
the name. This is done using a number, separated by hyphens, before the ‘amine’ part of
the name. The number indicates the carbon to which the amino group is bonded.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
8C FUNCTIONAL GROUPS: HALOALKANES, AMINES AND ALCOHOLS
297
NH2
pentanamine pentan-2-amine
Incorrect
Positional isomers are possible in
this molecule. The name needs to
specify the position of the functional
group.
Correct
This is the correct name for the
molecule. There are positional
isomers possible so the name
needs to differentiate
pentan-1-amine, pentan-2-amine
and pentan-3-amine.
• The parent hydrocarbon is numbered from the end closest to the amino group. This
ensures that the amino group carbon is assigned the lowest possible number.
NH2
2,2-dimethylpentan-4-amine 4,4-dimethylpentan-2-amine
Incorrect
The amino group takes priority and
should be given the lowest possible
number.
Correct
This is the correct name for the
molecule. The molecule is
numbered starting from the end
closest to the amino group.
Worked example 8C–3: Drawing the skeletal formula of an amine
VIDEO
WORKED
EXAMPLE 8C–3
Draw the structure of 3-ethylpentan-2-amine using the skeletal formula.
Solution
Logic Process
Step 1 Identify and draw the parent hydrocarbon.
Step 2 Number the parent hydrocarbon.
3-ethylpentan-2-amine
3-ethylpentan-2-amine
2 4
3 5
1
Step 3 Draw the amino functional group in the location
outlined by the name.
1
Step 4 NH2
2 4
3 5
3-ethylpentan-2-amine
3-ethylpentan-2-amine
NH2
Draw any alkyl groups in the location outlined
by the name.
3-ethylpentan-2-amine
3-ethylpentan-2-amine
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
298 CHAPTER 8 STRUCTURE AND PROPERTIES OF ORGANIC COMPOUNDS
Check-in questions – Set 4
1 Write the systematic name of the following amines.
a
b NH2
c NH2
NH2
2 Write the semi-structural formula of the following molecules.
a propan-1-amine
b 4-methylhexan-2-amine
c 2-methylpentan-3-amine
VIDEO 8C–1
SKILLS:
DRAWING
AND NAMING
FUNCTIONAL
GROUPS
WORKSHEET
8C–1 DRAWING
AND NAMING
FUNCTIONAL
GROUPS 1
8C SKILLS
DOC
Drawing and naming functional groups
During an assessment, making a single mistake when drawing a structure usually leads
to no marks being awarded for your work. Therefore, the skill of checking your drawings
should be essential, if time permits. A simple way to check the structures you’ve drawn
is to count the number of bonds to each carbon. Each carbon must always have exactly
four bonds. In this course, this usually means either a carbon with four single bonds or
one double bond and two single bonds. This is particularly useful for structural formulas,
where a common mistake is to miss a hydrogen or draw an extra hydrogen atom. In
a skeletal formula where hydrogens connected to carbons are usually not shown, you
can still check for any carbons with more than four bonds. Try applying this skill by
identifying all errors in the two structures below.
H
H
H O
H
C
C
C
C O H
OH
H
H
C H H
NH2
H
C
H
H
This same skill can also be applied to neutral oxygen and nitrogen atoms. A neutral
oxygen atom must have exactly two bonds and a neutral nitrogen atom must have
exactly three bonds.
Solutions to the above activity:
H
5 bonds
H
C
H
H
NH2
3 bonds
H
H
H O
C
C
C O H
C H H
C
H
H
5 bonds
OH
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
8C FUNCTIONAL GROUPS: HALOALKANES, AMINES AND ALCOHOLS
299
Section 8C questions
1 Draw the following alkanols and label them as primary, secondary or tertiary.
a butan-2-ol
b 3-methylpentan-3-ol
c 3,4-dimethylhexan-1-ol
d octan-3-ol
2 Write the IUPAC names of the following molecules.
a CH3CH2CH2CHOHCH2CH3
b CH2ClCHClCH2CH2CH3
c CH2OHCH2CH(CH3)CH(CH3)CH3
d CH3CH2CH(CH2CH3)CH2CH2CH2NH2
3 Draw the skeletal formulas of the following molecules.
a 2-bromoheptane
b 3-chloro-3-ethylpentane
c 3-methylbutan-2-ol
d 3-ethyl-2-methylhexan-2-ol
e 4-iodobutan-2-amine
f 5,5-dimethylhexan-1-amine
4 Which two molecules from Question 3 belong to the same homologous series?
5 Draw the structural formula of the following incorrect names and then provide the
correct IUPAC name.
a 3-methylhexan-4-ol
b 3-ethylbutan-2-amine
c 3-propylbutan-4-ol
6 Using the semi-structural formula, draw and name the following molecules.
a a branched chloroalkane with four carbon atoms
b a straight-chain amine with five carbons and the amino group on the third carbon
c an isomer of pentanol with two methyl groups attached to the parent chain
7 The structure of an amine is shown below.
NH2
a Write the IUPAC name of the amine.
b How many positional isomers does the amine have? Draw and name them all.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
300 CHAPTER 8 STRUCTURE AND PROPERTIES OF ORGANIC COMPOUNDS
8D
Functional groups: aldehydes, ketones,
carboxylic acids, esters and amides
Study Design:
•
The International Union of Pure and Applied
Chemistry (IUPAC) systematic naming of organic
compounds up to C8, with no more than two
functional groups for a molecule, limited to
non-cyclic hydrocarbons, haloalkanes, primary
amines, alcohols (primary, secondary and
tertiary), aldehydes, ketones, carboxylic acids
and non-branched esters
Molecular, structural and semi-structural
(condensed) formulas and skeletal structures
of alkanes (including cyclohexane), alkenes,
benzene, haloalkanes, primary amines, primary
amides, alcohols (primary, secondary and
tertiary), aldehydes, ketones, carboxylic acids
and non-branched esters
Glossary:
Aldehyde
Amide functional group
Carbonyl group
Carboxyl group
Carboxylic acid
Dimer
Ester
Ester functional group
Ketone
Primary amide
•
ENGAGE
The odour of butanedione
Fresh sweat excreted from our skin doesn’t have a smell. The unpleasant smell that
we associate with perspiration is due to bacterial activity. The bacteria that are always
present on our skin convert the compounds in our sweat into odorous compounds
that our nose can detect. One of these compounds is butanedione (Figure 8D–1). This
compound features two carbonyl functional groups – the main topic of this section.
O
H3C
C
C CH3
C
O
Figure 8D–1 Structure of butanedione, the compound we associate with body odour
8C FUNCTIONAL
GROUPS:
HALOALKANES,
AMINES AND
ALCOHOLS
LINK
Carbonyl group
a functional
group consisting
of –C O
EXPLAIN
Carbonyl functional group
The carbonyl group consists of a carbon atom double bonded to an oxygen atom: C O.
Drawing on the same concept from Section 8C, we can visualise a carbonyl group as
a carbon from an alkane having two hydrogen atoms substituted for an oxygen atom
(Figure 8D–2).
The carbonyl group is a common feature in all five families of organic molecules discussed
in this section. It is the functional group that characterises aldehydes and ketones. In
carboxylic acids, esters and amides, it forms part of a larger functional group (Figure 8D–3).
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
8D FUNCTIONAL GROUPS: ALDEHyDES, KETONES, CARBOXyLIC ACIDS, ESTERS AND AMIDES
301
Carbonyl functional group
H
O
H
H C
C
C
H
H
H
Figure 8D–2 The carbonyl functional group consists of a carbon double bonded to an oxygen.
Aldehyde
O
C
HR
O
C
R
NH2
O
C
R´R
Amide
O
C
Ketone
Carbonyl
group
O
C
OR
O
C
HR
RCHO
aldehyde
R´
O
C
OHR
Ester Carboxylic acid
Figure 8D–3 The carbonyl functional group is a feature in many families of organic molecules.
Aldehydes and ketones
Aldehydes and ketones are two families of organic compounds characterised by the presence
of a carbonyl functional group. Both aldehydes and ketones have the general chemical
formula Cn
H2nO. Aldehydes have a carbonyl group on the first carbon of the parent
hydrocarbon. This means that the carbonyl carbon of an aldehyde is always bonded to a H,
making the general structure of aldehydes RCHO, where R is either a hydrogen or an alkyl
group. The first member of the aldehyde homologous series is methanal.
H
H
O
O
O
H C
C
H C
C
C
H
H
H
H
H
HCHO
methanal
CH3CHO
ethanal
CH3CH2CHO
propanal
Figure 8D–4 General structure of aldehydes and the first three members of the homologous series
Aldehyde
a molecule
containing a
carbonyl group
where the
carbon atom
of the carbonyl
group is bonded
to a hydrogen
atom. It has the
general formula
RCHO
Ketone
a molecule
containing a
carbonyl group
where the
carbon of the
carbonyl group
is bonded to two
other carbon
atoms. It has the
general formula
RCOR’
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
H
302 CHAPTER 8 STRUCTURE AND PROPERTIES OF ORGANIC COMPOUNDS
In contrast, the carbonyl group in ketones must be located somewhere in the middle of
the carbon chain. In essence, aldehydes and ketones are positional isomers (compare the
structures of propanal in Figure 8D–4 and propanone in Figure 8D–5). The general structure
of ketones is RCOR’ where R and R’ represent two alkyl groups that may or may not be the
same. Therefore, the first member of the ketone homologous series is propanone.
O
C
R’R
H
RCOR’
ketone
H
C
H
HO
C
C
H
CH3COCH3
propanone
H
H
H
C
H
H
C
H
O
C
H
C
H
H
H
CH3CH2COCH3
butan-2-one
H
C
H
H
H O
C
C
C
H
H
H
C
H
CH3CH2CH2COCH3
pentan-2-one
Figure 8D–5 General structure of ketones and the first three members of the homologous series
The carbonyl functional group is polar due to oxygen being more electronegative than
carbon. This means that the oxygen of the carbonyl group is partially negative, while the
carbon is partially positive. Aldehydes and ketones are usually polar molecules. As a result,
intermolecular dipole–dipole interactions can form between molecules of aldehydes and
ketones as shown in Figure 8D–6.
δ–
Dipole–dipole
interaction
O
Cδ+
H C
H
H
H
H
H
C
O
δ–
H
C
δ+
H
Intermolecular dipole–
dipole interaction between
two ethanal molecules
δ–
H
H C
H
O
H
δ+
C C H
C
H
δ–
H
O
H
H C
C C H
C
δ+
H
H
Intermolecular dipole–
dipole interaction between
two propanone molecules
Dipole–dipole
interaction
Figure 8D–6 Dipole–dipole interaction between molecules of ethanal
and propanone
The two lone pairs of electrons on the carbonyl
oxygen also allows aldehydes and ketones to form
intermolecular hydrogen bonds with another
molecule with a H–F, H–O or H–N group. Two
aldehyde or ketone molecules cannot form hydrogen
bonds between themselves because they lack a H
bonded to F, O or N. However, aldehydes and ketones
can form hydrogen bonds with molecules like H2O as
shown in Figure 8D–7. This interaction explains why
small aldehydes and ketones are soluble in water.
δ–
O
H H
δ+ δ+
Hydrogen
bonds
δ–
O
δ+
H
δ–
O
C
δ+
H C
H
H
H
Figure 8D–7 Hydrogen bonding
between ethanal and water molecules
H
δ+
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
8D FUNCTIONAL GROUPS: ALDEHyDES, KETONES, CARBOXyLIC ACIDS, ESTERS AND AMIDES
303
Nomenclature of aldehydes
When naming aldehydes, the rules for naming alkanes need to be applied along with the
following rules specific to aldehydes.
• The names of aldehydes derived from alkanes are constructed by replacing the final ‘e’
in the name of the alkane with ‘al’. For example, the aldehyde derived from pentane is
called pentanal.
O
5
3
1
4
2
pentanal
Parent
hydrocarbon has
5 carbons
Only single bonds
between carbon
atoms
An aldehyde
with a carbonyl
group at carbon 1
• The parent hydrocarbon is numbered starting from the carbonyl carbon.
• There is no need to define the location of the carbonyl group in aldehydes since
it is assigned as 1 by default. Locations of other groups need to be specified in the
name accordingly.
O
3-methylbutan-1-al 3-methylbutanal
Correct
This is the correct name for the
molecule.
Incorrect
The carbonyl carbon in an aldehyde
is the first carbon by default.
Therefore, it is redundant to specify
its position in the name.
Nomenclature of ketones
When naming ketones, the rules for naming alkanes need to be applied along with the
following rules specific to ketones.
• The names of ketones derived from alkanes are constructed by replacing the final ‘e’
in the name of the alkane with ‘one’. For example, the ketone derived from propane is
called propanone.
H
O
H
H
C
C
H
H
H
propanone
• Where positional isomers are possible, the location of the carbonyl must be stated in the
name. This is done by using a number, separated by hyphens, positioned before the ‘-one’.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
304 CHAPTER 8 STRUCTURE AND PROPERTIES OF ORGANIC COMPOUNDS
• The parent hydrocarbon is numbered from the end closest to the carbonyl group. This
gives the carbonyl carbon the lowest possible number.
O
2-methylhexanone 5-methylhexan-3-one
Incorrect Correct
There are two errors in this name. The
This is the correct name for the
location of the carbonyl group is not
molecule.The carbonyl group has
stated, making the name ambiguous. In
been assigned the lowest possible
addition, the molecule has been numbered
number and the location has been
from left to right, which is incorrect. This
included in the name.
does not give the carbonyl group the lowest
possible number (if it were actually
stated in the name).
VIDEO
WORKED
EXAMPLE 8D–1
Worked example 8D–1: Drawing the skeletal structure of an aldehyde
Draw the skeletal structure of 5-methylhexanal.
Solution
Logic Process
Step 1 Draw the carbons for the parent hydrocarbon.
Number the carbons.
1
3
5
2
4
6
5-methylhexanal
5-methylhexanal
Step 2 Add the functional group in the correct location on
the parent chain.
O
3
5
1
2
4
5-methylhexanal
5-methylhexanal
6
Step 3 Add the alkyl group(s) in the correct location(s) on
the parent chain.
O
5-methylhexanal 5-methylhexanal
Check-in questions – Set 1
1 Copy the following diagram and write the number of hydrogen atoms connected to each
carbon indicated by the boxes.
O O
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
8D FUNCTIONAL GROUPS: ALDEHyDES, KETONES, CARBOXyLIC ACIDS, ESTERS AND AMIDES
305
2 Write the names of the following molecules.
a CH3COCH2CH3
b
O
c
H
H C H
H
H
H
H
C C
C C
C
H
H
O
H
H
H
3 Draw the structural formula of each of the following molecules.
a pentanal
b 2,4-dimethylpentan-3-one
c 3-ethyl-4-methylhexanal
Carboxylic acids
Carboxylic acids are a family of molecules characterised by the presence of a carboxyl group
(–COOH). The carboxyl group consists of a carbonyl group bonded to a hydroxyl group. In
a carboxylic acid derived from an alkane, the carboxyl group is always located on the first
carbon. Carboxylic acids derived from alkanes have the general formula Cn
H2n+1COOH.
This can be further simplified to RCOOH, where R represents either a hydrogen or an
alkyl group. The first three members of the carboxylic acid homologous series are shown
in Figure 8D–8.
H
H
O
O
O
H C
C
H C
C
C
OH
OH
OH
H
H
HCOOH
methanoic acid
CH3COOH
ethanoic acid
CH3CH2COOH
propanoic acid
Figure 8D–8 General structure and the first three members of the carboxylic acid homologous series
Carboxylic acids are weak organic acids that can donate the H from the carboxyl group.
Some of these acids can be commonly found in nature or around the household. For
example, methanoic acid is produced by species of ants as a self-defence chemical weapon
and ethanoic acid is what gives vinegar its sour taste.
a b
Carboxylic acid
a family
of organic
molecules
characterised by
the presence of
a carboxyl group
Carboxyl group
a functional
group consisting
of –COOH. It
consists of a
carbonyl group
bonded to a
hydroxyl group.
O
C
R OH H
RCOOH
carboxylic acid
Figure 8D–9 (a) Ants release methanoic acid to ward off potential threats.
(b) Household vinegar typically contains 4–8% ethanoic acid.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
306 CHAPTER 8 STRUCTURE AND PROPERTIES OF ORGANIC COMPOUNDS
Dimer
a complex
in which two
identical
or similar
molecules are
linked together
Carboxyl functional groups are polar. The C O and O–H portions allow the functional
group to form intermolecular hydrogen bonding between two molecules of carboxylic
acids. The complementary arrangement of two carboxyl groups allows carboxylic acids
to form dimers (Figure 8D–10). As a result, the intermolecular bonding between the two
carboxylic acids in a dimer is stronger than a typical hydrogen bond.
δ–
O
CH3
δ+
H
Hydrogen bond
δ–
O
δ–
O
Hydrogen bond
H
δ+
H3C
O
δ–
Figure 8D–10 Hydrogen bonding between two ethanoic
acid molecules to form a dimer
Nomenclature of carboxylic acids
When naming carboxylic acids, the rules for naming alkanes need to be applied along with
the following rules specific for carboxylic acids.
• The names of carboxylic acids derived from alkanes are constructed by replacing the last
letter in the name of the alkane with ‘oic acid’. For example, the carboxylic acid derived
from ethane is called ethanoic acid.
O
H
O
H
O
H
C
1
H
C
2 1
C
H C
3 2 1
C
OH
H
OH
H
OH
methanoic acid
ethanoic acid
propanoic acid
• The parent hydrocarbon is numbered starting from the carboxyl group carbon. This
means that the carboxyl group carbon is always assigned as 1.
• There is no need to specify the location of the carboxyl group since it is always the
first carbon by default. The location of other groups, such as alkyl groups, needs to be
specified in the name.
OH
O
3,4-dimethylpentan-1-oic acid 3,4-dimethylpentanoic acid
Incorrect
The carbon of the carboxyl group is the
first carbon by default and therefore
does not need to be included in the
name.
Correct
This is the correct name for the
molecule.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
8D FUNCTIONAL GROUPS: ALDEHyDES, KETONES, CARBOXyLIC ACIDS, ESTERS AND AMIDES
307
VIDEO
WORKED
EXAMPLE 8D–2
Worked example 8D–2: Drawing the skeletal structure of a carboxylic acid
Draw the skeletal structure of 3-ethylheptanoic acid.
Solution
Logic Process
Step 1 Draw the carbons for the parent hydrocarbon.
Number the carbons.
1
3
5
2
4
6
3-ethylheptanoic acid
3-ethylheptanoic acid
7
Step 2 Add the functional group in the correct location
on the parent chain.
HO
O
3
5
1
2
4
6
3-ethylheptanoic acid
3-ethylheptanoic acid
7
Step 3 Add the alkyl group(s) in the correct location(s)
on the parent chain.
O
HO
3-ethylheptanoic acid 3-ethylheptanoic acid
H
Ester
a molecule
containing the
ester functional
group with the
general formula
RCOOR’
Ester functional
group
a functional
group consisting
of –COO–
Esters
Esters are a family of organic molecules characterised by the ester functional group. An
ester is a derivative of a carboxylic acid in which the –OH portion of the carboxyl group is
substituted for an OR’ group, where R’ is an alkyl group. The general structure of an ester is
RCOOR’ , as shown in Figure 8D–11.
H
O
O
H
O
O
H
H
H
H C
C
C
R OR’
C
O
H C
H C
C
H O C
H
H O C
H
H
H
H
RCOOR’
ester
HCOOCH3
methyl methanoate
CH3COOCH3
methyl ethanoate
CH3CH2COOCH3
methyl propanoate
Figure 8D–11 General structures of the ester homologous series
The similarity between a carboxyl functional group and an ester functional group is not
a coincidence. Esters are usually made by reacting a carboxylic acid with an alcohol. The
carboxylic acid provides the RCO– portion of the ester and the alcohol provides the –OR’
portion. This is important when we discuss the nomenclature of esters. We will also discuss
reactions that form esters in more detail in Section 9B.
LINK
9B
ORGANIC
REACTIONS:
CONDENSATION
AND HYDROLYSIS
H
H
H
H
H
O
O
H
C
H C
C
O H
C
H C
C
H C
+ +
O H H
O C
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
RCOOH RCOOR´
+
+
HOR´ H2O
Figure 8D–12 Esters are produced from a reaction between a carboxylic acid and an alcohol.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
O
H
308 CHAPTER 8 STRUCTURE AND PROPERTIES OF ORGANIC COMPOUNDS
Esters are often fragrant molecules. Many esters have a pleasant floral or fruity scent or
flavour. Various naturally occurring esters contribute to the aroma of flowers and taste
of fruits. Esters are also produced and added to many food products to complement their
smell or taste. The artificial flavourings used in many food items are likely to be esters.
Figure 8D–13 shows the scent created by various ester molecules.
O
O
O
O
O
Like aldehydes and ketones, esters also
lack the necessary hydrogen required
to form hydrogen bonding with each
other. However, the oxygen atoms
in the functional group can form
hydrogen bonds with other molecules
like H2O, as shown in Figure 8D–15.
O
Figure 8D–13 Structures of esters with their associated scents: banana – 3-methylbutyl
ethanoate; pineapple – ethyl butanoate; apricot – pentyl butanoate
Esters are polar due to the electronegativity
difference between the carbonyl carbon and the
oxygen atoms. The partially negative oxygen atoms
of one ester molecule can form intermolecular
O
δ–
H
δ–
C
δ+
H
H C
O
O
C
C
H H
dipole–dipole interactions with the partially
positive carbonyl carbon of another ester, as shown
in Figure 8D–14.
H
O
δ–
Dipole–dipole
interaction
H
δ–
C
δ+
H
H C
O
O
C
C
H H
H
Figure 8D–14 Dipole–dipole interaction
between two methyl ethanoate molecules
δ–
δ–
O
H
δ+ δ+
O
H
δ+ δ+
O
δ–
H
δ–
C
δ+
H
H C
O
O
C
C
H H
H
Hydrogen
bonds
H H
δ+ δ+
O
δ–
Figure 8D–15 Hydrogen bonding between methyl
ethanoate and water
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
8D FUNCTIONAL GROUPS: ALDEHyDES, KETONES, CARBOXyLIC ACIDS, ESTERS AND AMIDES
309
Nomenclature of esters
The names of straight chain esters are made up of two words. The first word describes the
alcohol part of the molecule (Figure 8D–16). This portion of the molecule is named as an
alkyl group ending in ‘yl’.
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
methyl ethanoate
ethyl ethanoate
propyl ethanoate
butyl ethanoate
Figure 8D–16 The first word in the name of an ester describes the alcohol part of the structure.
The second word describes the carboxylic acid part of the molecule (Figure 8D–17). The
name of this portion of the molecule ends in ‘oate’. The names of the alcohol part and the
carboxylic acid part then combine to give the full name of the ester.
O
O
O
O
OH
O
O
O
methyl methanoate
methyl ethanoate
methyl propanoate
methyl butanoate
Figure 8D–17 The second word in the name of an ester describes the carboxylic acid part of
the structure.
Worked example 8D–3: Naming an ester
Write the name of the following ester.
O
DOC
O
VIDEO
WORKED
EXAMPLE 8D–3
WORKSHEET
8D–1 DRAWING
AND NAMING
FUNCTIONAL
GROUPS 2
Solution
Logic Process
Step 1 Identify the carboxylic acid part and the alcohol part
of the ester.
O
O
carboxylic
acid part
alcohol
part
Step 2 Number and write the name of the alcohol part first.
O
O
1
butyl
3
2 4
Step 3 Number and write the name of the carboxylic acid
part second.
3 2
O
1
O
butyl propanoate
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
310 CHAPTER 8 STRUCTURE AND PROPERTIES OF ORGANIC COMPOUNDS
Primary amide
a molecule
containing an
amide functional
group with the
general formula
RCONH2
Amide functional
group
a functional
group consisting
of –CONH2
Primary amides
Primary amides are a family of organic molecules characterised by the amide functional
group. Primary amides are derivatives of carboxylic acids where the hydroxyl (–OH) portion
of the carboxyl group is substituted for an amino (–NH2) group. Just like in carboxylic
acids, the carbon of the amide functional group is always the first carbon of the chain.
The general structure of primary amides is RCONH2 where R is either H or an alkyl group
(Figure 8D–18).
H
H
O
O
O
O
H C
C
H C
C
C
R NH2
C
H NH2
H
NH2
H
NH2
RCONH2
primary amide
HCONH2
methanamide
CH3CONH2
ethanamide
CH3CH2CONH2
propanamide
Figure 8D–18 General structure and the first three members of the primary amide
homologous series
Primary amides can form intermolecular hydrogen bonding with each other as shown
in Figure 8D–19. In addition, primary amides can also form hydrogen bonds with other
molecules, like H2O.
a b
δ+
H
O O
δ+
H
H
δ+
H C
C
δ–
δ–
O
δ+
H
H
N
δ+
H
H
δ+
H
H C
Hydrogen
bonds
C
δ–
N
δ–
O
H
H
H
H
δ+
C
H
C
N
H
δ–
O
H H
δ+
H
H
δ+
Figure 8D–19 (a) Hydrogen bond between two primary amides.
(b) Hydrogen bonds between a primary amide and water
δ–
O
H
δ+
Check-in questions – Set 2
1 Write the names of the following molecules.
a CH3CH2CH2COOCH3
b O
OH
c
H
H C
H
H C H
H
H
H C
C
C
H
H
H
C
O
O H
2 Draw the skeletal formulas of the following molecules.
a propyl propanoate
b 3-methylbutanoic acid
c ethyl butanoate
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
8D FUNCTIONAL GROUPS: ALDEHyDES, KETONES, CARBOXyLIC ACIDS, ESTERS AND AMIDES
311
Naming organic compounds with two functional groups
The diversity of organic molecules can be further expanded by having more than one
functional group on a molecule. While this idea may seem daunting, we will limit our
discussion to molecules with no more than two functional groups. These functional groups
may be identical or different in nature.
Naming molecules with two identical functional groups
The following rules need to be applied when naming a molecule with two identical
functional groups.
• Add a ‘di’ before the part of the name relevant to the functional group; for example,
CH2Br2 is called dibromomethane.
• The ‘e’ is returned if ‘di’ is used after the name of the hydrocarbon; for example,
CHOCH2CHO is called propanedial.
• If positional isomers are possible, then the location of both functional groups needs to be
specified; for example, CH2OHCH2CH2OH is called propane-1,3-diol.
• An ‘a’ is added after the first part of the name for molecules with two C C double
bonds; for example, buta-1,3-diene instead of but-1,3-diene.
Table 8D–1 shows examples of molecules with two identical functional groups from each of
the families we have discussed so far and how the rules are applied.
Table 8D–1 Names of molecules with two identical functional groups
Family Structure Name
Alkene Buta-1,3-diene
Chloroalkane Cl
Cl 1,4-dichlorobutane
Amine H2N NH2
Butane-1,4-diamine
Alkanol HO OH
Butane-1,4-diol
Aldehyde O
O Butanedial
O
Ketone
Butane-2,3-dione
O
O
HO
Carboxylic acid
OH Butanedioic acid
O
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
312 CHAPTER 8 STRUCTURE AND PROPERTIES OF ORGANIC COMPOUNDS
Naming molecules with two different functional groups
When naming molecules with two different functional groups, we must assess and rank the
functional groups in terms of their priority. IUPAC has prioritised each functional group
according to the rules in Table 8D–2.
Table 8D–2 IUPAC functional group priorities
Priority Class Functional group Alternative name Suffix
Highest Carboxylic acids –COOH carboxy -oic acid
Aldehydes –CHO oxo -al
Ketones –CO– oxo -one
Alcohols –OH hydroxy -ol
Amines –NH2 amino -amine
Alkenes C C –ene– -ene
Lowest Haloalkanes –X halo* –
*Halo refers more specifically to fluoro-, chloro-, bromo- or iodo-
Once the group with the highest priority is identified, the parent hydrocarbon is numbered
from the end closest to that group. This ensures that the highest priority functional group
always gets the lowest possible number. The functional group with the highest priority
forms the suffix (last) part of the name. The other functional group(s) use their alternative
names and form the prefix or first part of the name. The flow chart in Figure 8D–20
outlines the general process for naming molecules with two (or more) functional groups.
Identify all functional
groups and determine
the one which has the
highest priority.
Number the parent
hydrocarbon starting
from the end closest to
the highest priority
functional group.
Write the name of the
parent hydrocarbon with
the suffix corresponding
to the highest priority
functional group.
Write the alternative
name of the remaining
functional group and the
names of any alkyl groups
in alphabetical order as
the prefix of the name.
Figure 8D–20 Flow chart showing the general process for naming molecules with two (or more) functional groups
WORKSHEET
8D–2 NAMING
MOLECULES
WITH TWO
FUNCTIONAL
GROUPS
DOC
Table 8D–3 on the following page shows different combinations of butane derivatives with
two functional groups. The name of each molecule is shown below its structure.
The worked examples on page 314 demonstrate the process for naming molecules with two
different functional groups.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Table 8D–3 Names of butane derivatives with two functional groups
Functional
groups
Chloro Alkene Amino Hydroxyl Carbonyl (ketone) Carbonyl
(aldehyde)
Chloro
Cl
Cl
1,4-dichlorobutane
Cl
4-chlorobut-1-ene
Cl
NH2
4-chlorobutan-1-amine
Cl
OH
4-chlorobutan-1-ol
Cl
O
4-chlorobutan-2-one
Cl
O
4-chlorobutanal
Alkene
H2N
buta-1,3-diene but-3-en-1-amine
HO
but-3-en-1-ol
O
but-3-en-2-one
O
but-3-enal
Amino
H2N
NH2
butane-1,4-diamine
HO
NH2
4-aminobutan-1-ol
O
NH2
4-aminobutan-2-one
O
NH2
4-aminobutanal
Drummond et al © Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
Hydroxyl
HO
OH
butane-1,4-diol
O
OH
4-hydroxybutan-2-one
O
OH
4-hydroxybutanal
Carbonyl
(ketone)
O
O O
O 3-oxobutanal
butane-2,3-dione
Carbonyl
O
(aldehyde) butanedial
O
Carboxylic
acid
Carboxylic acid
Cl
O
OH
4-chlorobutanoic acid
HO
O
but-3-enoic acid
HO
O
NH2
4-aminobutanoic acid
HO
O
OH
4-hydroxybutanoic acid
HO
O
O
3-oxobutanoic acid
HO
O
O
4-oxobutanoic acid
HO
O
OH
O
butanedioic acid
MOLECULES
WITH MULTIPLE
FUNCTIONAL
GROUPS
NAMING
VIDEO 8D–1
8D FUNCTIONAL GROUPS: ALDEHyDES, KETONES, CARBOXyLIC ACIDS, ESTERS AND AMIDES
313
314 CHAPTER 8 STRUCTURE AND PROPERTIES OF ORGANIC COMPOUNDS
VIDEO
WORKED
EXAMPLE 8D–4
Worked example 8D–4: Naming a molecule with two different
functional groups (1)
Write the name of the following molecule.
Solution
OH
Logic Process
Step 1 Identify all functional groups and determine
the one which has the highest priority.
Highest priority: carbonyl (ketone)
Other functional group: hydroxyl group
Step 2 Number the parent hydrocarbon starting
from the end closest to the highest
priority functional group.
OH
4 2
5 1
3
Step 3 Write the name of the parent
hydrocarbon with the suffix
corresponding to the highest priority
functional group. OH
O
4 2
5 1
3
pentan-2-one
Step 4 Write the alternative name of the
remaining functional group and the
names of any alkyl groups in alphabetical
order as the prefix of the name. OH
4 2
5 1
3
4-hydroxypentan-2-one
VIDEO
WORKED
EXAMPLE 8D–5
Worked example 8D–5: Naming a molecule with two different functional
groups (2)
Draw the structure of 2-amino-3-methylbutanoic acid.
Solution
Logic Process
Step 1 Draw the carbons for the parent
hydrocarbon. Number the carbons. C C C C
1 2 3 4
2-amino-3-methylbutanoic acid
Step 2 Add the highest priority functional group
associated with the suffix of the name.
O
C C C C
1 2 3 4
H O
2-amino-3-methylbutanoic acid
Step 3 Add the structures associated with the
prefix of the name.
O
H O
H
N
C
C
C
C
1 2 3 4
C
H H
H
2-amino-3-methylbutanoic acid
Step 4 Add the remaining hydrogens.
O
H O
C
N
H
H
H
C
C
C
H
H
H H
C
H
H
2-amino-3-methylbutanoic acid
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
8D FUNCTIONAL GROUPS: ALDEHyDES, KETONES, CARBOXyLIC ACIDS, ESTERS AND AMIDES
315
Check-in questions – Set 3
1 Write the names of the following molecules.
a OH
b
H H
O
H
C
C
C
H
N
OH
H H
c CH3CHClCHCH2
2 Represent the following molecules, using their skeletal formula.
a 3-bromopentanoic acid
b hex-5-enal
c 3-aminobutan-1-ol
3 Draw and name a structural isomer of 1-bromopropanone.
8D SKILLS
VIDEO 8D–2
SKILLS:
ANALYSING
MOLECULE
NAMES
Analysing molecule names
Learning to interpret the information embedded in the name of a molecule is an essential
skill in this chapter. Each name can be broken up into three parts – a prefix, a parent and
a suffix. The prefix describes any alkyl groups, halo groups and other functional groups
that are not of the highest priority in the molecule. The parent name describes the longest
continuous carbon chain, also known as the parent hydrocarbon. The suffix includes
information about the highest priority functional group. The examples below show how
names can be separated into prefix, parent and suffix parts. Practise analysing molecule
names using this approach to help you become familiar with this system.
Prefix + Parent name + Suffix
2-bromobutane
The structure contains
a bromo group attached
to the second carbon on
the parent hydrocarbon.
The parent hydrocarbon
contains four carbons.
The name ends with
‘ane’ signifying that all
C–C bonds are single
bonds.
4-methylpentanoic acid
The structure contains
a methyl (CH3) side
chain attached to the
4th carbon on the
parent hydrocarbon.
The parent hydrocarbon
is saturated and
contains five carbons.
There is a carboxyl group
on the parent hydrocarbon
making this molecule a
carboxylic acid.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
316 CHAPTER 8 STRUCTURE AND PROPERTIES OF ORGANIC COMPOUNDS
Section 8D questions
OH
O
H
1 What elements are in the following functional groups?
a carboxyl
b amide
c carbonyl
d ester
2 Write the IUPAC names of the following molecules.
a O
c
H O
H H
H
H
C
C
C
C
C O
C
H
H
H
H
b O
d
H
H H
H
H H
H
C
C
C
C
C
C
H
H
H
H
H
H H
C
H
H
C
3 Draw the skeletal formulas of the following molecules.
a 2-ethylbutanal
c propyl butanoate
b 2,4-dimethylhexanoic acid
4 Draw the structural formulas of the following molecules.
a heptan-3-one
c butanamide
b 2-ethylpentanal
5 Using the semi-structural formula, write and name the following molecules.
a an aldehyde that is an isomer of butanal
b a ketone that is an isomer of butanal
c a carboxylic acid that has a total of five carbon atoms and two methyl groups
d an ester that has three carbons
6 Draw a diagram showing hydrogen bonding between two propanoic acid molecules.
7 Copy and complete the following table. The first row has been completed as an example.
Structure Name of functional groups IUPAC name
Cl
Chloro
Hydroxyl
1-chloropentan-3-ol
OH
NH2
OH
Pent-4-en-2-one
O
OH
Br
O
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
8E PhySICAL PROPERTIES OF ORGANIC COMPOUNDS
317
8E
Physical properties of organic
compounds
Study Design:
•
Trends in physical properties within homologous
series (boiling point and melting point, viscosity),
with reference to structure and bonding
Glossary:
Boiling point
Fluid
Kinetic energy
Melting point
n-Alkane
Vapour pressure
Viscosity
ENGAGE
The longest-running experiment
In 1927, an experiment was set up to demonstrate that pitch, the material more
commonly known as bitumen used on our roads, is a highly viscous liquid instead of a
solid at room temperature. Professor Parnell of The University of Queensland poured
a heated sample of pitch into a glass funnel, which was sealed on one end. Three years
later in 1930, he cut the stem of the funnel (Figure 8E–1).
Since then, the pitch has very slowly dripped out of the funnel. The process is so slow
that it took more than eight years for the first drop to fall. The next five drops took
over 40 years to collect. The experiment continues today and is the longest experiment
to have ever been conducted. Table 8E–1 below summarises the major events of the
experiment. You may notice that the 8th and 9th drops have taken longer than the
historical average. This is because air conditioning was installed in the building after the
7th drop, lowering the average temperature of the experiment.
Table 8E–1 Timeline of the Pitch drop experiment at the
University of Queensland
Event Date Duration (years)
1927 Hot pitch poured
Oct 1930 Stem cut
Dec 1938 1st drop fell 8.1
Feb 1947 2nd drop fell 8.2
Apr 1954 3rd drop fell 7.2
May 1962 4th drop fell 8.1
Aug 1970 5th drop fell 8.3
Apr 1979 6th drop fell 8.7
Jul 1988 7th drop fell 9.2
Figure 8E–1 The Pitch drop
experiment set up in 1927
is still running today.
Nov 2000 8th drop fell 12.3
Apr 2014 9th drop fell 13.4
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
318 CHAPTER 8 STRUCTURE AND PROPERTIES OF ORGANIC COMPOUNDS
8B MOLECULES
OF CARBON
8C FUNCTIONAL
GROUPS:
HALOALKANES,
AMINES AND
ALCOHOLS
8D FUNCTIONAL
GROUPS:
ALDEHYDES,
KETONES,
CARBOXYLIC
ACIDS AND
ESTERS
LINK
LINK
LINK
EXPLAIN
Review of intermolecular forces
The functional groups we have discussed in previous sections determine the types of
intermolecular bonding present between molecules. Functional groups are usually polar,
resulting in partially positive and negative regions within a molecule. Polar molecules can
interact via electrostatic forces of attraction known as dipole–dipole interactions. In certain
cases where a H atom is bonded to a F, N or O atom, hydrogen bonding (a stronger form of
dipole–dipole interaction) is possible. In addition, dispersion forces (or London dispersion
forces) exist between all molecules regardless of whether they are polar or non-polar. Dispersion
forces are the result of instantaneous dipoles caused by the random movement of electrons
within an atom or molecule. Table 8E–2 below summarises the types of intermolecular forces
present between molecules in each family of organic compounds. You may wish to review how
these molecules interact with each other by revisiting the previous sections in this chapter.
Table 8E–2 Types of intermolecular bonding between molecules of different families
Family Dispersion forces Dipole–dipole interaction Hydrogen bonding
Alkane ✓ ✗ ✗
Alkene ✓ ✗ ✗
Haloalkane ✓ ✓* ✗
Aldehyde ✓ ✓ ✗
Ketone ✓ ✓ ✗
Ester ✓ ✓ ✗
Primary amine ✓ ✗ ✓
Alcohol ✓ ✗ ✓
Carboxylic acid ✓ ✗ ✓
*Not all haloalkanes are polar. For example, tetrachloromethane is a non-polar molecule due to its
symmetry. Therefore, dipole–dipole interactions do not exist between its molecules.
A key concept within this section is understanding how the strength of intermolecular
forces changes due to structural diversity. Recall that molecules from the same
homologous series have the same functional group and therefore possess the same types of
intermolecular bonding, as outlined in Table 8E–2. The combination of all different types of
intermolecular forces (hydrogen bonding, dipole–dipole interactions and dispersion forces)
between two molecules gives the overall strength of intermolecular forces between them.
For example, when two alkanols interact, both hydrogen bonding and dispersion forces
contribute to the overall strength of intermolecular forces between them (Figure 8E–2).
It may be noted from Figure 8E–2 that the contributions from the hydrogen bonding
(red dotted lines) towards the overall intermolecular forces is similar across the three
different members of the alkanol homologous series. This is because interactions like
hydrogen bonding and dipole–dipole interactions are localised to regions with polar
functional groups. In contrast, the number of dispersion forces (blue dotted lines) between
the molecules depends on the size of the molecules. Larger members of a homologous
series have a greater number of dispersion forces and therefore stronger dispersion forces
between molecules. As a result, larger members of a homologous series also have
stronger overall intermolecular forces acting between them than smaller members due
to their stronger dispersion forces.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
8E PhySICAL PROPERTIES OF ORGANIC COMPOUNDS
319
δ+
H
δ+
H
H
δ–
O C H
δ–
O
H
H
C H
H
δ+
H
δ–
O
δ+
H
H H
C C
H H
H H
C C
H H
Hydrogen bonding
Dispersion forces
H
H H
δ–
O
H
δ–
O
C C C
H
δ+
H
H H
H H
H
H
δ–
O
C C C
H
δ+
H
H H
Increasing molar mass
Increasing strength of intermolecular forces (dispersion forces)
Figure 8E–2 Illustration of the different types of intermolecular forces between members of the
alkanol homologous series
The strength of dispersion forces is also dependent on the surface area with which two
molecules interact. The greater this surface area, the stronger the dispersion forces
holding them together. For example, Figure 8E–3 shows molecules of pentane and
2,2-dimethylpropane interacting. The two molecules are structural isomers with the
same molar mass. However, the interaction between the two pentane molecules (straight
chain isomers) occurs through greater surface area than the interaction between the
two 2,2-dimethylpropane molecules (branched isomers). This is because the straight
chain isomer adopts a long and thin rod shape with a high degree of surface area
available to interact with other molecules. In contrast, the branched isomer adopts a
rounded shape and has reduced surface area for interaction. In general, the strength of
dispersion forces between molecules decreases as the number of alkyl branches in the
structure increases.
a
b
• Larger surface area of interaction
between molecules
• Stronger dispersion forces
• Stronger overall intermolecular forces
• Smaller surface area of interaction
between molecules
• Weaker dispersion foces
• Weaker overall intermolecular forces
Figure 8E–3 Illustration of dispersion forces between: (a) two molecules of pentane and
(b) two molecules of 2,2-dimethylpropane. Despite the two pairs of molecules being
structural isomers with the same molar mass, the intermolecular force between the
straight chain isomers is stronger than the branched isomers due to greater surface area
of interaction.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
320 CHAPTER 8 STRUCTURE AND PROPERTIES OF ORGANIC COMPOUNDS
Kinetic energy
the energy an
object or particle
has due to its
motion
Vapour pressure
the pressure
exerted by the
gas particles of
a substance just
above its liquid
or solid phase
Boiling point
the temperature
at which a
substance
begins to boil,
which occurs
when the vapour
pressure of
the substance
equals the
atmospheric
pressure
The two concepts discussed on the previous pages are crucial for understanding the trends
in physical properties (boiling points, melting points and viscosity) of molecules from the
same homologous series. To summarise, molecules from the same homologous series have:
• stronger overall intermolecular forces as the size of the molecule increases.
• weaker overall intermolecular forces as the number of alkyl branches in the
structure increases.
Boiling point of organic compounds
Heating a liquid substance causes its particles to vibrate and move with greater kinetic
energy. Particles with sufficient kinetic energy can break free of the liquid phase and
transition into the gaseous phase. Particles that become gases exert a vapour pressure against
the surrounding atmosphere. The temperature at which the vapour pressure exerted by
these ‘escaped’ gaseous particles equals the atmospheric pressure is the boiling point (b.p.) of
the substance. The boiling process is usually associated with rapid evaporation, formation
of vapours and vigorous bubbling in the liquid phase. Figure 8E–4 shows a simple set-up
for determining the boiling point of a substance. A sample of the substance in a test tube
is heated to its boiling point (characterised by transition from liquid to gas at constant
temperature) using a heat source. A thermometer is suspended above the liquid phase to
record the temperature of the gases as the sample evaporates.
Figure 8E–4 Steam and bubbling are observed when water boils at 100°C at sea level (left). An
illustration of an apparatus used for determining the boiling point of a sample (right)
At a molecular level, causing an organic substance to boil involves using heat to overcome
the intermolecular forces between molecules. Therefore, substances with stronger
intermolecular forces have higher boiling points because a greater amount of heat is
required to overcome these interactions between molecules. It can be seen from
Table 8E–2 that different families of organic compounds possess different types of
intermolecular forces with different strengths. When comparing candidates with similar
molar mass from each family, compounds capable of strong hydrogen bonding usually have
the highest boiling points, followed by those with dipole–dipole interactions and then those
with dispersion forces only (Figure 8E–5).
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
8E PhySICAL PROPERTIES OF ORGANIC COMPOUNDS
321
Boiling point of compounds with different types of intermolecular bonding
Strongest type of
intermolecular bonding
Dispersion forces only
Dipole–dipole interactions
Hydrogen bonding
Boiling point (°C)
160
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
Pentane
Pent-1-ene
1-Chloropropane
Methyl ethanoate
Butan-2-one
Butanal
Butan-1-amine
Butan-1-oI
Propanoic acid
Compound
Figure 8E–5 Graph showing the boiling point of compounds with similar molar masses but different
types of intermolecular bonding
Since boiling point increases as the overall strength of intermolecular forces increases,
we can expect predictable trends for molecules within the same homologous series. In
particular, the effects of molar mass and alkyl branches and the reasons for these effects are
important to note.
Effect of molar mass on boiling point
As molar masses (proportional to the number of carbons) of molecules increase within
a homologous series, their boiling points also increase (Figure 8E–6). This is because
larger molecules can form a greater number of dispersion forces between molecules. This
means that the overall intermolecular forces are stronger in larger members of the same
homologous series. More heat is required to overcome these stronger forces and allow the
substance to transition from a liquid to a gas state.
Boiling points of the first eight members of each homologous series
300
250
200
150
Boiling point (°C)
100
50
0
–50
0 1 –100
–150
–200
Number of carbons
Figure 8E–6 Boiling points increase as molar masses increase within the same homologous series
of compounds.
2 3 4 5 6 7 n-Alkane
Aldehyde
Alkan-1-ol
8 Alkanoic acid
n-Alkane
a straight-chain
(unbranched)
alkane
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
322 CHAPTER 8 STRUCTURE AND PROPERTIES OF ORGANIC COMPOUNDS
Effect of alkyl branches on boiling point
When comparing isomers, the boiling point of compounds decreases as the number or size
of alkyl branches increases. This is because molecules with more alkyl branches usually
adopt shapes that have less surface area to interact with other molecules. As a result,
they generally have weaker dispersion forces and therefore weaker overall intermolecular
forces. Less heat is required to overcome the intermolecular forces between more branched
isomers, resulting in a lower boiling point. The boiling points of the three C5H12 skeletal
isomers shown in Figure 8E–7 demonstrate this trend.
b.p. 36.1°C b.p. 27.8°C b.p. 9.5°C
Increasing number of alkyl branches
Decreasing boiling point
Figure 8E–7 Comparing the boiling point of structural isomers of C5H12. As the number of alkyl
branches increases, the boiling point decreases.
Boiling points of molecules with functional groups are affected in a similar manner by the
presence of alkyl branches. Figure 8E–8 shows that alkan-1-ols with increasing number of
alkyl branches have decreasing boiling points.
HO
HO HO
b.p. 138°C b.p. 129°C b.p. 113.5°C
Increasing number of alkyl branches
Decreasing boiling point
Figure 8E–8 Comparing the boiling point of structural isomers of C5H12O. As the number of alkyl
branches increases, the boiling point decreases.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
8E PhySICAL PROPERTIES OF ORGANIC COMPOUNDS
323
Melting point of organic compounds
Atoms or with
intermolecular forces
The process of melting involves a substance
transitioning from a solid state to a liquid
state. Molecules in a solid state are held by
their intermolecular forces in fixed positions
(Figure 8E–9). Heating a substance would cause
its particles to vibrate with increasing kinetic
energy. A solid organic substance would melt if
the intermolecular forces holding the molecules in
their fixed positions are overcome by the kinetic
energy of its molecules. The temperature at which
a solid substance transitions to a liquid is called its
melting point (m.p.).
The processes of melting and boiling both share
the idea of using heat to overcome the interaction
between molecules. Therefore, the trends
Molecular solid
observed in the melting points of substances
share similarities with those of the boiling points
discussed on pages 320–322. More specifically,
Figure 8E–9 Molecules in the solid state
are locked in fixed positions by their
intermolecular forces.
larger molecules with stronger intermolecular
forces generally have higher melting points (Figure 8E–10). This is because more heat
energy is required to overcome stronger intermolecular forces and disrupt the molecules
from their fixed positions in the solid state.
Melting point
the temperature
range from
which a solid
first starts to
transition to a
liquid state until
this process has
finished (i.e. all
of the solid has
become liquid
or completely
melted)
General trend of melting points within alkan-1-ol
and alkane homologous series
Melting point (°C)
0
–20
–40
–60
–80
–100
–120
–140
–160
–180
–200
Alkan-1-ol
n-Alkane
0 1 4
32 5
Number of carbons
6 7 8 9
Figure 8E–10 General trend of melting points within alkan-1-ol and alkane homologous series
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
324 CHAPTER 8 STRUCTURE AND PROPERTIES OF ORGANIC COMPOUNDS
Check-in questions – Set 1
1 Complete the table below by writing the state (solid, liquid or gas) of the substances
at 25°C.
Substance m.p. (°C) b.p. (ºC) State at 25ºC
A 50 124
B –39 16
C –60 55
2 Rank the following molecules in order of increasing boiling point.
a butan-1-ol, ethanol, propan-2-ol, methanol
b pentane, 2,2-dimethylhexane, hexane, 3-methylpentane
c 4-methylpentanoic acid, butanoic acid, 2,3-dimethylbutanoic acid, hexanoic acid
Viscosity
a measure of a
fluid’s resistance
to flow
Fluid
a substance that
has no fixed
shape and gives
way to external
pressure.
Liquids and
gases are
considered fluids
Viscosity of organic compounds
The viscosity of a fluid is a measure of its resistance to flow due to the intermolecular forces
between molecules. We often interact with fluids of varying viscosity in our daily lives. For
example, you may notice that more effort is required to pour/squeeze tomato sauce, honey
or cooking oil from their containers than it is to pour water out of a bottle. This is because
fluids like tomato sauce, honey and oil have a greater resistance to flow or a higher viscosity.
Figure 8E–11 Substances like tomato sauce, honey and cooking oil are more viscous than water.
There are numerous methods to compare the viscosity of fluids. One of the simplest ways is
to drop a marble down a tube containing the fluid, as shown in Figure 8E–12a. The time it
takes the marble to fall a specific distance is recorded. The longer it takes the marble to fall
through the fluid, the more viscous the fluid. Another method involves a coiled glass tube,
as shown in Figure 8E–12b. The longer it takes the fluid to pass through the coiled tube, the
more viscous the fluid.
a b
Less viscous More viscous
Figure 8E–12 Different ways of comparing viscosity of fluids: (a) dropping a marble through the
fluids in tubes and (b) racing the fluids through coiled tubes
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
8E PhySICAL PROPERTIES OF ORGANIC COMPOUNDS
325
At a molecular level, viscosity is another physical property that is linked to the strength of
intermolecular bonds. Molecules in a liquid state can flow past each other due to movement
caused by their own kinetic energy and due to external forces like being poured out of a
container or pushed through a pipe. The intermolecular forces between molecules attempt
to hold the molecules together and cause them to resist freely sliding past each other or
flowing. The stronger the intermolecular forces between molecules, the higher the viscosity
of the substance. When comparing molecules within the same homologous series, viscosity
increases as molar mass increases. Table 8E–3 shows how the viscosity of n-alkanes
changes depending on their size.
Another factor that influences viscosity is temperature. As a substance is heated up, the
increasing kinetic energy of its molecules gradually overcomes the intermolecular forces
between the molecules. This allows the molecules to move past each other more freely.
Therefore, viscosity decreases as temperature increases. For example, Table 8E–4 shows
how the viscosity of ethanol changes as temperature increases.
Table 8E–3 Viscosity of n-alkanes at 20ºC
Table 8E–4 Viscosity of ethanol at various temperatures
Temperature (oC)Viscosity (mPa s)
n-alkane Molar mass
(g mol–1)
Viscosity
(mPa s)
–25 3.26
Pentane 72 0.224
0 1.786
Hexane 86 0.295
25 1.074
Heptane 100 0.389
50 0.694
Octane 114 0.509
75 0.476
VIDEO 8E–1
SKILLS:
RESPONDING TO
QUESTIONS
8E SKILLS
Responding to questions that ask you to explain your answer
Let’s consider the following question:
Butan-1-ol and octan-1-ol are two molecules in the same homologous series. Which molecule has the higher
boiling point? Explain your answer.
Questions that require you to compare the properties of two organic molecules in a short-answer
response are common but can also be challenging. Demonstrating your understanding in a concise and
unambiguous way is critical for obtaining all the marks allocated to that question. Different people may
have different styles in how they communicate the necessary information. One way you may wish to
structure your response is to use the premise–reasoning–outcome (PRO) strategy:
Premise (P) – the known facts or scientific laws that govern the given scenario
Reasoning (R) – a sequential and logical chain of reasons that link the premise to the outcome
Outcome (O) – the answer or formal response to the scenario
Let’s have a look at how the PRO strategy can be applied to formulate a response:
[Boiling point of compounds increases as the strength of their intermolecular forces increases.(P)]
[Butan-1-ol and octan-1-ol both take part in hydrogen bonding through their hydroxyl group, and
separately through dispersion forces. Octan-1-ol has stronger dispersion forces than butan-1-ol because
it’s a larger molecule with more electrons. Therefore, more energy is required to overcome the stronger
intermolecular forces between octan-1-ol molecules than butan-1-ol molecules.(R)] [As a result, octan-1-ol
should have the higher boiling point of the two molecules.(O)]
You may wish to practise using the PRO strategy in some of the Section 8E questions.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
326 CHAPTER 8 STRUCTURE AND PROPERTIES OF ORGANIC COMPOUNDS
Section 8E questions
1 Copy and complete the following table.
Intermolecular force(s)
Compound
Strongest Other types (if any)
CH3CH2CHClCH3
CH3CH2CHOHCHO
2-aminopropanoic acid
3-methylpent-1-ene
2 Draw the structural formula of the following compounds.
a a compound with the molecular formula C3H6O2 that has a lower boiling point than
propanoic acid
b a compound with the molecular formula C3H6O that can form hydrogen bonds
between its molecules
3 Define ‘viscosity’ and describe how it changes with temperature.
4 Arrange the following compounds in order of increasing boiling point and explain
your answer.
O
I
O
O
O
II
III
IV
5 Biodiesels are ester molecules produced from plant oils or animal fats. It is desirable for
biodiesel to be a low viscosity liquid so that it can be pumped through fuel lines with
relative ease. Two esters were produced from natural sources and tested as candidates
for biodiesel.
Structure Source Name m.p. (oC) b.p. (oC)
C11H23COOCH3 Coconut milk Methyl laurate 4 262
C17H35COOCH3 Fish Methyl stearate 37 355
a Write the semi-structural formula of both esters.
b Are both esters suitable as biodiesel at room temperature (25°C)? Explain.
c Explain why methyl stearate has a higher melting point than methyl laurate.
d Suggest a way to reduce the viscosity of methyl stearate.
6 Glycerol and propan-2-ol are two compounds containing the hydroxyl functional
group. Given their structures below, explain why glycerol is a more viscous liquid
than propan-2-ol.
OH
OH
OH
Glycerol Propan-2-ol
HO
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
327
Chapter 8 review
Summary
Create your own set of summary notes for this chapter on paper or in a digital document. A model
summary is provided in the Teacher Resources, which can be used to compare with yours.
Checklist
In the Interactive Textbook, the success criteria are linked from the review questions and will be
automatically ticked when answers are correct. Alternatively, print or photocopy this page and tick
the boxes when you have answered the corresponding questions correctly.
Success criteria – I am now able to: Linked questions
8A.1 8A.2 8A.3 8A.4 8B.1 8B.2 8B.3 8C.1 8C.2 8C.3 8D.1 8D.2 8D.3 8E.1 8E.2 8E.3  Recall that carbon prefers to form covalent bonds due to its number
of valence electrons
 Describe the features of covalent bonds, including relative bond
strength and bond stability
 Recognise that hydrocarbons (including alkanes and alkenes) can
form structural isomers
 Represent the molecular, structural and semi-structural formulas,
as well as the skeletal structures, of organic compounds
 Determine the systematic IUPAC names of alkanes and alkenes
(including branched isomers) from their structures
 Draw the structural, semi-structural and skeletal formulas of
alkanes and alkenes from their IUPAC names
 Determine the degree of unsaturation from a compound’s
molecular formula
 Determine the systematic IUPAC names of haloalkanes, amines
and alcohols from their structures
 Draw the structural, semi-structural and skeletal formulas of
haloalkanes, amines and alcohols from their IUPAC names
 Identify and explain the structural features of primary, secondary
and tertiary alcohols
 Determine the systematic IUPAC name of aldehydes, ketones,
carboxylic acids and non-branched esters from their structures
 Draw the structural, semi-structural and skeletal formulas of
aldehydes, ketones, carboxylic acids, non-branched esters and
primary amides from their IUPAC names
 Determine the systematic IUPAC names of organic compounds
with two functional groups
 Recall the key features of different types of intermolecular forces/
bonding
 Identify the intermolecular forces/bonds present in different
families of organic molecules
 Discuss the trends in physical properties (boiling point, melting
point, viscosity) with reference to structure and bonding of
molecules within a homologous series
2☐, 4☐
3☐
6☐
11☐, 13☐
7☐, 12☐
11☐
5☐
1☐, 12☐
11☐, 13☐
8☐
9☐, 10☐, 12☐
11☐, 13☐
15☐
14☐, 16☐, 17☐
14☐, 16☐
17☐, 18☐
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
328
Multiple-choice questions
1 Which of the following is the correct IUPAC name of CH3CH2CH2CHClCH3?
A 2-chlorohexane
B 1-chloropentane
C 2-chloropentane
D 4-chloropentane
2 Which statement below is incorrect about alkenes?
A Alkenes have a degree of unsaturation greater than or equal to 1.
B The general formula of alkenes is Cn
H2n.
C Alkenes can have more than one C C double bond.
D Alkenes are saturated molecules.
3 Which bond has the highest bond stability?
A C–F
B C–Cl
C C–Br
D C–I
4 Which of the following is not a covalent bond?
A C–Br
B C–Li
C C–Si
D C–P
5 The degree of unsaturation of C4H6O is
A 0
B 1
C 2
D 3
6 Which of the following is an isomer of 3-ethylpent-2-ene?
A 3-ethylhex-2-ene
B 3-methylpent-2-ene
C 2,3-dimethylbut-2-ene
D hept-3-ene
7 Which of the following is the correct IUPAC name for the following compound?
A 4-ethylpent-3-ene
B 2-ethylpent-3-ene
C 4-methylhex-3-ene
D 3-methylhex-3-ene
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
329
8 Which of the following is a secondary alcohol?
A 3-methyloctan-2-ol
B 2,2-dimethylhexan-1-ol
C 2-methylbutan-2-ol
D 3-methyloctan-1-ol
9 Which of the following is the correct name for a branched carboxylic acid with the molecular
formula C5H10O2?
A pentanoic acid
B 2-ethylpropanoic acid
C 3-methylbutanoic acid
D methyl butanoate
10 Which functional group is most likely found in a compound with the molecular formula
C4H10O?
A carboxyl
B ester
C carbonyl
D hydroxyl
Short-answer questions
11 Draw the structural formulas of the following compounds.
a pentyl propanoate  (1 mark)
b 3-ethylpentan-3-amine (1 mark)
c hexan-3-one  (1 mark)
d 2-methylbutane  (1 mark)
12 i Name the homologous series to which each of the following compounds belong.
ii Write the IUPAC name for each compound.
a CH3(CH2)3CH2OH  (2 marks)
b CH3CHCHCH2CH(CH3)CH3  (2 marks)
c CH3CH(CH3)CH2COCH3  (2 marks)
d CH3CH2COOCH2CH3 (2 marks)
13 Draw the skeletal formula of the following compounds.
a 3-methylhexan-2-ol  (1 mark)
b 2-chloro-2-methylpentane  (1 mark)
c 2-aminobutanoic acid  (1 mark)
d butane-2,3-dione  (1 mark)
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
330
14 Complete the following table.  (4 marks)
Compound Intermolecular force(s)
Strongest Other types (if any)
CH3COCH3
CH3CHOHCH2CH2Br
2-amino-3-methylbutanoic acid
2-methylhexan-2-ene
15 The following are incorrect names. Draw the structure they represent, then determine the
correct IUPAC name.
a pent-4-ene  (2 marks)
b 3-hydroxylbutan-2-amine  (2 marks)
c 2-chloro-3-ethylbutane  (2 marks)
d 3-bromo-3-propylpropanal  (2 marks)
16 Draw a labelled diagram showing all intermolecular forces between two propan-1-ol
molecules. (3 marks)
17 The following amines are structural isomers.
NH2 NH2
NH2
I
II
III
a Arrange the molecules in order of increasing viscosity.  b Explain your answer to part a.  18 Methane and paraffin wax are both alkanes, but they have very different physical
properties as shown in the table below. Explain why the two substances have
different boiling and melting points.  (1 mark)
(3 marks)
(3 marks)
Substance Molecular formula m.p. (°C) b.p. (°C)
Methane CH4 –182 –162
Paraffin wax C25H52 37 370
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
332
UNIT
4
HOW ARE CARBON-BASED COMPOUNDS DESIGNED
FOR PURPOSE?
CHAPTER
9
REACTIONS OF ORGANIC
COMPOUNDS
Introduction
Organic compounds play a vital role in many aspects of our daily lives. They are
a major component of plastics, fuels, pharmaceuticals and a wide range of other
products. Therefore, being able to produce organic compounds in a sustainable
and cost-effective manner is important to us. The study of organic reactions
is an area of chemistry that enables us to understand how organic compounds
change when subjected to certain reaction conditions. It allows chemists to reliably
predict the outcomes of a reaction and design synthetic pathways to create complex
target molecules.
Curriculum
Area of Study 1 Outcome 1
How are organic compounds categorised and synthesised?
Study Design: INTRODUCTION
VIDEO
REACTIONS
OF ORGANIC
COMPOUNDS
Learning intentions – at the end of the
chapter I will be able to:
•
Organic reactions and pathways, including
equations, reactants, products, reaction
conditions and catalysts (specific enzymes
not required):
– synthesis of primary haloalkanes and
primary alcohols by substitution
– addition reactions of alkenes
– the esterification between an alcohol
and a carboxylic acid
– hydrolysis of esters
– pathways for the synthesis of primary
amines and carboxylic acids
– transesterification of plant triglycerides
using alcohols to produce biodiesel
9A  Organic reactions: substitution,
addition and oxidation
9A.1  Classify the type of reaction
(substitution, addition or oxidation)
when given an equation or a description
of the reaction
9A.2  Write the equations (including reactants,
products, reaction conditions and
catalysts) of substitution reactions to
synthesise primary haloalkanes and
primary alcohols
9A.3  Write the equations (including reactants,
products, reaction conditions and
catalysts) of addition reactions of alkenes
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
333
Study Design: Learning intentions – at the end of the
chapter I will be able to:
– hydrolytic reactions of proteins,
carbohydrates and fats and oils to
break down large biomolecules in food
to produce smaller molecules
– condensation reactions to synthesise
large biologically important molecules
for storage as proteins, starch, glycogen
and lipids (fats and oils)
9A.4 9A.5  Write the equations (including reactants,
products, reaction conditions and
catalysts) of oxidation reactions to
synthesise carboxylic acids
 Draw reaction pathways (including
reactants, intermediate compounds,
products, reaction conditions and catalysts)
to synthesise carboxylic acids or amines
•
Organic reactions and pathways, including
equations, reactants, products, reaction
conditions and catalysts (specific enzymes
not required):
– synthesis of primary haloalkanes and
primary alcohols by substitution
– addition reactions of alkenes
– the esterification between an alcohol
and a carboxylic acid
– hydrolysis of esters
– pathways for the synthesis of primary
amines and carboxylic acids
– transesterification of plant triglycerides
using alcohols to produce biodiesel
– hydrolytic reactions of proteins,
carbohydrates and fats and oils to
break down large biomolecules in food
to produce smaller molecules
– condensation reactions to synthesise
large biologically important molecules
for storage as proteins, starch, glycogen
and lipids (fats and oils)
9B Organic reactions: condensation and
hydrolysis
9B.1  Classify the type of reaction
(condensation, hydrolysis, or
transesterification) when given an
equation or a description of the reaction
9B.2  Write the equations (including reactants,
products, reaction conditions and
catalysts) of condensation reactions to
synthesise esters and other biologically
important molecules (proteins, starch,
glycogen and lipids)
9B.3  Write the equations (including reactants,
products, reaction conditions and
catalysts) of hydrolysis reactions to convert
esters and other biologically important
molecules (proteins, starch, glycogen and
lipids) into smaller molecules
9B.4  Write the equations (including reactants,
products, reaction conditions and
catalysts) of transesterification reactions to
convert plant triglycerides into biodiesel
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
334
Study Design: Learning intentions – at the end of the
chapter I will be able to:
•
•
Calculations of percentage yield and atom
economy of single-step or overall reaction
pathways, and the advantages for society
and for industry of developing chemical
processes with a high atom economy
The sustainability of the production of
chemicals, with reference to the green
chemistry principles of use of renewable
feedstocks, catalysis and designing safer
chemicals
9C Designing sustainable organic reactions
9C.1  Calculate the overall percentage yield of
a reaction or a reaction pathway
9C.2  Calculate the overall percentage atom
economy of a reaction or a reaction
pathway
9C.3  Discuss the advantages of developing
chemical processes with a high
percentage atom economy
9C.4  Discuss how the sustainable production
of chemicals can be achieved through
the application of green chemistry
principles
VCE Chemistry Study Design extracts © VCAA; reproduced by permission.
Glossary
Actual yield
Addition reaction
α-Glucose
Amylose
By-product
Carbohydrate
Catalyse
Catalysis
Catalyst
Condensation reaction
Disaccharide
Enzyme
Esterification reaction
Fatty acid
Glycerol
Glycogen
Glycosidic bond
Green chemistry
Halogenation reaction
Hazardous substance
Hydration reaction
Hydrogenation reaction
Hydrohalogenation
Hydrolysis reaction
Intermediate compound
Limiting reagent (or reactant)
Lipid
Monosaccharide
Oxidation
Oxidising agent
Peptide
Percentage atom economy
Percentage yield
Polysaccharide
Protein
Reaction pathway
Reagent
Renewable feedstock
Saponification reaction
Spectator ion
Starch
Stoichiometric
Substitution reaction
Theoretical yield
Transesterification
Triglyceride
Ultraviolet light
Waste
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
335﻿ CONCEPT MAP
Concept map
9A Organic reactions: substitution, addition and oxidation
Writing equations and
drawing reaction pathways
CI2 or Br2 NH3
Haloalkane
Pathway 1
Alkane
Primary amine
UV light
HCI or HBr or HI
Pathway 2
Alkene
9B Organic reactions: condensation and hydrolysis
Writing equations and
drawing reaction pathways
+
OH
H2O H+
Hydrolysis reaction
Reactant Product A Product B
Calculating % yield and atom economy with
a view on Green Chemistry Principles
9C Designing sustainable organic reactions
1. Waste
prevention
4. Design
safer
chemicals
7. Use
renewable
feedstocks
10. Design for
degradation
2. Atom
economy
3. Less
hazardous
chemical
syntheses
5. Safer
solvents and
auxiliaries
6. Design
for energy
efficiency
8. Reduce
derivatives 9. Catalysis
11. Real-
time analysis
for pollution
prevention
12. Inherently
safer chemistry
for accident
prevention
See the Interactive Textbook for an interactive version of this concept map
interlinked with all concept maps for the course.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
336 CHAPTER 9 REACTIONS OF ORGANIC COMPOUNDS
9A
Organic reactions: substitution,
addition and oxidation
Study Design:
•
Organic reactions and pathways, including
equations, reactants, products, reaction conditions
and catalysts (specific enzymes not required):
– synthesis of primary haloalkanes and primary
alcohols by substitution
– addition reactions of alkenes
– the esterification between an alcohol and a
carboxylic acid
– hydrolysis of esters
– pathways for the synthesis of primary amines
and carboxylic acids
– transesterification of plant triglycerides using
alcohols to produce biodiesel
– hydrolytic reactions of proteins,
carbohydrates and fats and oils to break
down large biomolecules in food to produce
smaller molecules
– condensation reactions to synthesise large
biologically important molecules for storage
as proteins, starch, glycogen and lipids
(fats and oils)
Glossary:
Addition reaction
By-product
Catalyse
Catalyst
Enzyme
Halogenation reaction
Hydration reaction
Hydrogenation reaction
Hydrohalogenation reaction
Intermediate compound
Oxidation
Oxidising agent
Reaction pathway
Reagent
Spectator ion
Substitution reaction
Ultraviolet light
ENGAGE
Mustard gas – a banned chemical warfare agent
The use of chemicals as weapons first occurred in World War I when German forces
released chlorine gas (Cl2) upon the French and British forces in the battle of Ypres.
Subsequently, the use of chemical warfare was employed by both sides to cause
irreversible and catastrophic damage to the soldiers in trenches. One of the more
common chemical agents was mustard gas (ClCH2CH2SCH2CH2Cl). This very reactive
substance would produce blisters over the surface of the body upon contact. Mustard
gas works by reacting with water on the surface of skin or in lung tissue to produce
hydrochloric acid, HCl. The extremely corrosive HCl then causes severe burns to the
body. This type of reaction, also known as a substitution reaction, is discussed in detail
in this section.
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
Cl
C C S C
C Cl + 2H2O
HO
C C S C
C OH + 2HCl
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
Mustard gas
Figure 9A–1 Reaction between mustard gas and water to produce HCl
It is estimated from autopsies that about 400 000 soldiers were killed due to mustard gas. The
1925 Geneva Gas Protocol banned the use of any chemical or biological weapons in warfare.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
9A ORGANIC REACTIONS: SUBSTITUTION, ADDITION AND OXIDATION
337
Figure 9A–2 Australian infantry
in Ypres, 1917. They are wearing
small box respirators, which worked
against chlorine gas but could not
protect against mustard gas.
Catalyse
to speed up a
reaction
Catalyst
a substance
that increases
the rate of
a chemical
reaction by
lowering the
activation energy
by providing
an alternative
reaction pathway
and is itself
not consumed
as part of the
reaction
Enzyme
a protein
molecule that
acts as a catalyst
in a specific
biochemical
reaction
EXPLAIN
Reactions of organic compounds
An organic reaction is a chemical reaction that involves organic compounds as reactants.
Like all other chemical changes, organic reactions involve breaking of bonds within the
reactant molecules followed by formation of new bonds to yield the products. These
reactions can be catalysed by a variety of substances acting as a catalyst, such as acids, bases,
enzymes and transition metals. They can also be initiated by heat, light or other
forms of energy.
There are many different types of organic reactions, including substitution reactions,
addition reactions, oxidation reactions, condensation reactions and hydrolysis reactions.
The specific type of reaction that occurs depends on the functional groups present on the
reactant molecules and the conditions under which the reaction is carried out. The changes
that occur during a reaction usually revolve around modifications to the functional groups
in the molecule (Figure 9A–3), which is where your focus should be.
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
C C C FG1
H
C C C FG2
H
H
H
H
H
H
FG1 and FG2 represent different functional groups
Figure 9A–3 Organic reactions involve a change in the
functional group.
LINK
9B
ORGANIC
REACTIONS:
CONDENSATION
AND HYDROLYSIS
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
Substitution
reaction
a reaction in which
an atom or group of
atoms is replaced
by another atom or
group of atoms
Ultraviolet light
a form of
electromagnetic
radiation with
wavelengths shorter
than those of
visible light and
hence is invisible to
most humans
8C FUNCTIONAL
GROUPS:
HALOALKANES,
AMINES AND
ALCOHOLS
LINK
By-product
a product of a
chemical reaction
or industrial
process that is
produced as a
direct result of the
desired reaction,
and so appears as
part of the fully
balanced chemical
equation
Halogenation
reaction
a chemical reaction
that involves the
incorporation of one
or more halogen
atoms into a
compound
Reagent
a chemical
compound or
mixture, typically
inorganic,
introduced to cause
the desired change
in an organic
substance
338 CHAPTER 9 REACTIONS OF ORGANIC COMPOUNDS
Substitution reactions
Substitution reactions involve exchanging an atom (or a group of atoms) in a molecule
for another atom (or group of atoms). The general equation for a substitution reaction is
shown in Figure 9A–4. In most cases, the atoms of the functional group in the reactant are
substituted for new atoms to form the product. Several types of substitution reactions are
discussed below.
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
C C C A
H
C C C B
H
H
H
Substitution
reactions
H
H
H
A and B represent different atoms or groups of atoms
Figure 9A–4 General process of substitution reactions
Substitution reactions involving alkanes
Alkanes can react with halogens (Cl2 or Br2) in the presence of ultraviolet light (UV light)
to produce haloalkanes in a substitution reaction (Figure 9A–5). In this reaction, a halogen
atom from Cl2 or Br2 substitutes a hydrogen atom on the alkane. The displaced hydrogen
atom bonds with the remaining halogen atom to form hydrogen chloride (HCl) or
hydrogen bromide (HBr) as the by-product of the reaction. This process is also known as a
halogenation reaction because it introduces a halogen atom into the organic molecule.
H
H
H
H
UV light
H
C C H + Cl2
H
C C Cl + HCl
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
C C H + Br2
H
C C Br + HBr
H
H
H
H
Figure 9A–5 Substitution reactions involving alkanes (ethane
in this example) and halogens
A feature of this reaction is that it can be used to introduce more than one halogen atom
into the molecule. The substitution reaction can occur more than once on the same
molecule if excess Cl2 or Br2 reagent is added. For example, after methane reacts with Cl2
to form chloromethane, a second substitution can occur to produce dichloromethane
(Figure 9A–6). Further repetition of the same substitution reaction yields trichloromethane
and ultimately, tetrachloromethane.
H
H
Cl
Cl
Cl
C H
Cl2
UV light
H
C Cl
Cl2
UV light
H
C Cl
Cl
C Cl
Cl
C Cl
UV light
UV light
H
H
H
H
Cl
+ HCl + HCl + HCl + HCl
Figure 9A–6 A sequence of substitution reactions between methane and Cl2 (under UV light) can yield di-, tri-
and tetrachloromethane.
UV light
Cl2
Cl2
H
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
9A ORGANIC REACTIONS: SUBSTITUTION, ADDITION AND OXIDATION
339
LINK
One of the major drawbacks of this reaction is that it is very difficult to exclusively direct
the reaction to occur at a specific hydrogen in the molecule. This is not a problem for small
alkanes like methane or ethane because the same product is obtained regardless of which
hydrogen is substituted. However, in the case of larger alkanes this substitution reaction
can lead to more than one haloalkane product. For example, when propane reacts with
Cl2 under UV light, substitution can occur at either the two CH3 groups at the ends of the
molecule or at the CH2 group in the middle of the molecule. As shown in Figure 9A–7, both
scenarios usually occur simultaneously during the reaction, resulting in a mixture of two
different products that are positional isomers.
Cl2
UV light
H
H
Cl
C C
H
H
H
C H
H
H
H
H
C C
H
H
H
C H
Mixture of two
different products
(positional isomers)
H
Cl2
UV light
H
H
H
C C
H
H
Cl
C H
H
Figure 9A–7 The halogenation reaction between propane and Cl2 under UV light
gives a mixture of two products.
Substitution reactions involving haloalkanes
Haloalkanes can react with aqueous metal hydroxides (LiOH(aq), NaOH(aq), KOH(aq)
etc.) to produce alkanols in a substitution reaction (Figure 9A–8). In this reaction, the
hydroxide ion (OH–) from the metal hydroxide substitutes the halogen atom on the
organic molecule. The displaced halide usually couples with the cation from the metal
hydroxide to form an ionic by-product. In some cases, the metal cation, which acts as a
spectator ion, is omitted from the equation.
H
H
H
C C
H
H
H
C + Cl
NaOH(aq)
H
C C
C + OH
NaCl(aq)
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
Br
H
OH
H
H
C
C +H
KOH(aq)
C
C H
+ KBr(aq)
H
H
H
I
C C
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
OH
H
C +H
OH–(aq)
C C
H
C +H
I–(aq)
H
H
H
Figure 9A–8 Substitution reactions involving haloalkanes and aqueous metal hydroxides
Haloalkanes can also react with ammonia (NH3) to form primary amines in a substitution
reaction (Figure 9A–9). In this case, the ammonia molecule substitutes the halogen on the
organic molecule to install the amino group (NH2). The by-product of this reaction is a
hydrogen halide (HCl, HBr or HI).
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
8C FUNCTIONAL
GROUPS:
HALOALKANES,
AMINES AND
ALCOHOLS
Spectator ion
a cation or anion
that is present
on both sides
of a chemical
equation
and remains
unchanged
during the
reaction
H
H
340 CHAPTER 9 REACTIONS OF ORGANIC COMPOUNDS
H
H
H
H
C C
H
H
Br
H
C
H
H
I
C C
H
H
H
C + Cl
NH3
H
H
C +H
NH3
H
H
C +H
NH3
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
C C
C + NH2
HCl
H
H
H
NH2
H
C
C H
+ HBr
H
H
H
NH2
H
C C
C +H
HI
H
H
H
VIDEO
WORKED
EXAMPLE 9A–1
Figure 9A–9 Substitution reactions involving haloalkanes and ammonia
Worked example 9A–1: Substitution reaction of haloalkanes
Complete the following equation by drawing the structural formula of the product and by-products.
H
H
H
C C
H
H
Cl
H
C C
H
H
H
C +H
H
NH3
Solution
Logic Process
Step 1 Identify the
functional group
of the reactant
involved in the
reaction.
H
H
H
C C
H
H
Cl
H
C C
H
H
H
C H
H
Step 2 Recall the type
of reaction
by analysing
the reagents/
reaction
conditions.
The reaction is a substitution reaction where an atom or group of atoms in the
reactant is replaced by another atom or group of atoms.
Step 3 Draw the
product of the
reaction in the
equation.
H
H
H
C C
H
H
Cl
H
C C
H
H
C H + NH3
H
H
H
H
H
C C
H
H
H
N
H
C C
H
H
H
C H
H
Step 4 Include any
by-products
and balance the
equation.
H
H
H
C C
H
H
Cl
H
C C
H
H
H
C H + NH3
H
H
H
H
C C
H
H
H
N
H
C C
H
H
H
C H + HCl
H
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
9A ORGANIC REACTIONS: SUBSTITUTION, ADDITION AND OXIDATION
341
Check-in questions – Set 1
1 Complete the following equations by drawing the missing structure in the box.
a Br
+ NaOH(aq) + NaBr
b
+ NH3 + HCl
Cl
c
+ Br2 CH3CH2CHBrCH3
UV light + HBr
d
+
NaOH(aq)
H
H
H C
H
C C
H
H
H
H
C
H
H
C H
O
+ NaI
H
2 Write the missing reagents or reaction conditions in the following equations.
a
C4H10 +
C4H9Br
+ HBr
b
Cl NH2
+ HCl
c + NaCl
C6H13Cl +
C6H14O
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
342 CHAPTER 9 REACTIONS OF ORGANIC COMPOUNDS
8B MOLECULES
OF CARBON
LINK
Addition reaction
a reaction in
which two or
more reactants
combine to form
a larger product.
Addition
reactions require
an unsaturated
reactant
Hydrogenation
reaction
a reaction
in which a
hydrogen
molecule is
added to an
unsaturated
molecule
Addition reactions of alkenes
Addition reactions of alkenes are chemical reactions in which a molecule is added across the
double bond of an alkene. To achieve this, the double bond of the alkene is broken and the
two carbon atoms form new single bonds with the added molecule (Figure 9A–10). The
resulting molecule is a saturated compound.
H
H
A B H
A B
H
C C C H
+ A B
H
C C C H
H
C C C H
H H H
H H H
H H H
Alkene Bonds breaking
(represented by dashed lines)
Product
Figure 9A–10 General process of addition reactions of alkenes
As we change the small molecule (A–B in the above figure) in the reaction, we can add
different functional groups to the product. This makes alkenes a versatile starting material
to synthesise a range of different organic compounds. Different types of addition reactions
are given different names depending on the type of molecule (A–B) being added. We will
examine a few important types of addition reactions of alkenes in detail. It is worthy to note
that while each type of addition reaction has its own name, it is also correct to collectively
refer to them all as addition reactions.
Hydrogenation – addition reactions involving hydrogen gas (H2)
Hydrogenation reactions are a type
of addition reaction in which H2 is
added across the C C double bond
of an unsaturated molecule. The
C C double bond is converted to
a C–C single bond. This reaction is
useful for producing a wide range of
food products, including margarine,
pharmaceuticals and other industrial
materials. Hydrogenation is carried
out in the presence of a transition
metal catalyst such as nickel (Ni),
palladium (Pd) or platinum (Pt)
(Figure 9A–12).
Figure 9A–11 Hydrogenation reactions are useful
in the creation of margarine and other spreads.
H
H
H H
H
C C C H Pd
+ H H
H
C C C H
H H H
H H H
H
H
H
H H
H
C
C C C H Ni
+ H H
H
C C C
C H
H
H H H
H H H
H
Figure 9A–12 Equations showing the addition of hydrogen (H2) to an
unsaturated alkene producing a saturated alkane
H
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
9A ORGANIC REACTIONS: SUBSTITUTION, ADDITION AND OXIDATION
343
LINK 8B MOLECULES
OF CARBON
+ Cl Cl
+ Br Br
Halogenation – addition reactions involving a halogen (X2)
Another type of addition reaction involves the reaction of alkenes with halogens such as Cl2
and Br2. The two halogen atoms are added across the C C double bond to give a molecule
with two halo functional groups on neighbouring carbons (Figure 9A–13). As this reaction
introduces halogens into the organic molecule, it is called a halogenation reaction.
Cl
Cl
H
H
C C
H
C
C H
H H
H
H
H
H
H
H Br
Br
H
H
C
C C
C
H
C C C
C H
H
H
H H
H H H
H
H
H
H
Br Br
H
H
C
C C C H
+ Br Br
H
C C C
C H
H H H
H
H H H
H
Figure 9A–13 Equations showing the addition of a halogen to an alkene to
give a haloalkane
Hydrohalogenation – addition reactions involving a hydrogen halide (HX)
Hydrohalogenation reactions are a type of addition reaction in which a hydrogen halide
(HX, where X is a halogen atom) is added across a C C double bond to form a haloalkane
(Figure 9A–14).
H
Cl
H
H
C C
H
C
C H
H H
H
H
H
H Br
H
H
H
C
C
C
H C C
C H
H
H
H
H
H
H H
H
H
H Br
H
H
C
C C C H
+ H Br
H
C C C
C H
H
H H H
H H H
H
Figure 9A–14 Equations showing the addition of a hydrogen halide (HX) to
an alkene producing a haloalkane
It is important to note that two different products may be formed if the alkene starting
material is not symmetric. This is because the H–X molecule can orient itself in
two different ways during the addition reaction leading to two different structures
(Figure 9A–15). For example, when propene reacts with HBr, the Br atom can form a bond
with either the first carbon or the second carbon depending on its orientation. As a result,
two different positional isomers, 1-bromopropane and 2-bromopropane, are formed as a
mixture of products.
LINK 8B MOLECULES
OF CARBON
+ H Cl
Hydrohalogenation
reaction
a reaction in
which a hydrogen
halide molecule
is added to an
unsaturated
molecule
+ H Br
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
344 CHAPTER 9 REACTIONS OF ORGANIC COMPOUNDS
H Br
H
C C
H H
C
7C COMMERCIAL
ELECTROLYTIC
CELLS
LINK
Hydration
reaction
a reaction in
which a water
molecule is
added to an
unsaturated
molecule
8C
FUNCTIONAL
GROUPS:
HALOALKANES,
AMINES AND
ALCOHOLS
LINK
H
H Br
H
H Br
H
C C C H
H H H
H
H
H
H
Br H
H Br
H
C C C H
H
H
C C C H
H H H
1-bromopropane
H
Br H
C C C H
H H H
H H H
2-bromopropane
Figure 9A–15 Equation showing the addition of HBr to propene to produce a mixture
of 1-bromopropane and 2-bromopropane
Hydration – addition reactions involving water (H2O)
The addition reaction involving a molecule of water adding across a C C double bond to
give an alcohol is called a hydration reaction. The ‘hydra’ part of the name refers to water
being used for the reaction. This reaction is typically performed at high temperature
(150–200°C) and uses phosphoric acid (H3PO4) or sulfuric acid (H2SO4) as a catalyst. For
example, the addition of H2O to but-2-ene in the presence of H3PO4 gives the product
butan-2-ol. Figure 9A–16 shows examples of hydration reactions of alkenes.
H
OH
H
H
H3PO4
C C
+ H
OH
H
C
C H
H H
H
H
H
H OH
H
H
H
C C
C
C C C
C H
H
H
H
H H
H
H
H
H
H OH
H
H
C
C C C H
+ H OH
H
C C C
C H
200°C
H
H H H
H H H
H
Figure 9A–16 Equations showing the addition reaction of water molecules to alkenes
In a similar fashion to hydrohalogenation, if the alkene is not symmetric, two different
products are usually obtained after the reaction. This is because the water molecule can add
across the C C double bond in two different orientations. For example, if pent-2-ene is
reacted with H2O in the presence of H3PO4, a mixture of both pentan-2-ol and pentan-3-ol
would be formed upon completion of the reaction (Figure 9A–17).
200°C
H3PO4
+ H OH
200°C
H3PO4
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
H
H
H
H
9A ORGANIC REACTIONS: SUBSTITUTION, ADDITION AND OXIDATION
345
H OH
H3PO4
H
H H
H OH H
H OH
H H
C C
C C
C
H
H
C C C C
C
200°C
H H H
H
H
H
H
H
H H H
H
Pentan-3-oI
H
H C C
C
C C
H
H
H H
H H
H OH
H3PO4
H
HO H
H H
H
OH
H
H H
H
C C
C C
C
H
C C C C
C
200°C
H H H
H
H
H H H
H
Pentan-2-oI
H
Figure 9A–17 Equations showing the addition of a water molecule (H2O) to pent-2-ene to produce a mixture
of pentan-2-ol and pentan-3-ol
Summary of addition reactions to alkenes
Addition reactions involving alkenes are useful for a variety of applications, including the
production of plastics, fuels, pharmaceuticals and other chemicals vital for everyday goods.
Some common examples include:
• the addition of hydrogen gas to an alkene to form an alkane, which is commonly used in
the production of fuels and margarine
• the addition of halogens (such as Cl2 or Br2) to an alkene to form a dihaloalkane,
which is used as a solvent, a refrigerant or a starting material for the synthesis of other
chemicals
• the addition of water to an alkene to form an alcohol, which is used as a solvent, a fuel or
a starting material for the synthesis of other chemicals.
12A
ORGANIC
COMPOUNDS AS
MEDICINES
Dihaloalkane
LINK
LINK 1A
TYPES OF FUELS
X2
Haloalkane HX
Alkene
H2O
H2
Ni or Pd or Pt
H3PO4
high temperature
Alkane
Alcohol
Figure 9A–18 Summary of addition reactions to alkenes, where ‘X’ represents a
halogen such as Cl, Br or I
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
346 CHAPTER 9 REACTIONS OF ORGANIC COMPOUNDS
Figure 9A–19 Halogenation reactions are used in the production of
pharmaceuticals such as antibiotics and antidiabetic drugs.
Check-in questions – Set 2
1 Name all products formed during the addition reaction between ethene (CH2CH2) and
the following small molecules.
a HCl b H2 c H2O d Br2
2 Name and draw the skeletal formula of all products formed during the addition reaction
between propene (CH3CHCH2) and the following compounds.
a HI b H2 c H2O d Cl2
3A
REDUCTION AND
OXIDATION
8D
FUNCTIONAL
GROUPS:
ALDEHYDES,
KETONES,
CARBOXYLIC ACIDS
AND ESTERS
LINK
LINK
Oxidation reactions of primary alcohols
Oxidation of primary alcohols is a process that converts a primary alcohol into a carboxylic
acid or an aldehyde, depending on the specific reaction conditions and the type of oxidising
agent used. Reacting a primary alcohol with an oxidising agent in the presence of acid (H+)
would give a carboxylic acid. Figure 9A–20 shows common examples of oxidising agents
used in this reaction:
• potassium dichromate (K2Cr2O7) or dichromate (Cr2O7
2–)
• potassium permanganate (KMnO4) or permanganate (MnO4
–).
Oxidation
a loss of
electrons
Oxidising agent
the reactant in
a redox reaction
that causes
oxidation. It is
itself reduced
and therefore
will gain
electrons – its
oxidation number
will decrease
Figure 9A–20 Samples of K2Cr2O7 (left) and KMnO4 (right) are strong oxidising
agents used to oxidise primary alcohols to carboxylic acids.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
9A ORGANIC REACTIONS: SUBSTITUTION, ADDITION AND OXIDATION
347
Heat can be applied to this reaction to ensure the oxidation proceeds to give a carboxylic
acid. An aldehyde can be obtained by performing the reaction at a lower temperature or
with a mild oxidising agent. Once the aldehyde is formed, it can be further oxidised to the
carboxylic acid by treatment with KMnO4 or K2Cr2O7 (Figure 9A–21).
MnO4
–/H+
or
Cr2O7
2–/H+
LINK
8D FUNCTIONAL
GROUPS:
ALDEHYDES,
KETONES,
CARBOXYLIC
ACIDS AND
ESTERS
H H
H
O
H C C
OH
H C C
O H
H
H
H
Primary alcohol Carboxylic acid
H
MnO4
–/H+ or
Cr2O7
2–/H+
O
H C C
MnO4
–/H+ or
Cr2O7
2–/H+
H
Low temperature Heat
H
Aldehyde
Figure 9A–21 Oxidation of primary alcohols using acidified KMnO4 and K2Cr2O7
Organic reaction pathways
Reaction pathways are a sequence of chemical reactions that can convert a relatively
cheap and common starting material into a desired product, often with greater molecular
complexity. Intermediate compounds are formed after each reaction and used in the
subsequent reactions until the desired product is eventually formed. Each reaction can also
be referred to as a ‘step’ in the pathway, so the sequence outlined in Figure 9A–22 has a
total of three steps.
Reagents
and
catalyst
Reagents
and
catalyst
Reactant
Reagents
and
catalyst
Intermediate 1
Intermediate 2 Reaction
conditions
Reaction
conditions
Reaction
conditions
Step 1 Step 2 Step 3
Figure 9A–22 General scheme of a reaction pathway
Product
Reaction
pathway
a sequence of
reactions that
convert a simple
starting material
into a desired
product
Intermediate
compound
a chemical
compound that
is synthesised
from a simpler
compound
and intended
to be used for
preparation of
more complex
molecules
When drawing a pathway, there is no need to balance the reactants and products of the
steps. The focus is on the structure of the reactant, intermediate compounds and the
desired product, so all other reagents are written above the arrows. Information about
solvent, temperature and time are written below the arrows. States are usually not required
for the organic structures but may be important for certain reagents like NaOH(aq).
The design of organic reaction pathways involves selecting and optimising the steps of a
chemical synthesis to produce a desired product in an efficient and cost-effective manner.
To illustrate this idea, we will use the reactions discussed in this section to construct
pathways to synthesise primary amines and carboxylic acids.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
348 CHAPTER 9 REACTIONS OF ORGANIC COMPOUNDS
Pathways to synthesise primary amines
Figure 9A–23 shows two general pathways for the synthesis of primary amines. Pathway 1
begins with an alkane starting material. A substitution reaction involving the alkane and a
halogen under UV light yields a haloalkane intermediate. A second substitution reaction
between the haloalkane and ammonia, NH3, gives the desired primary amine.
Alternatively, Pathway 2 begins with an alkene undergoing an addition reaction with a
hydrogen halide to give a haloalkane intermediate. Subsequent reaction with ammonia,
NH3, gives the desired amine product.
CI2 or Br2 NH3
Haloalkane
Pathway 1
Alkane Primary amine
10A
ANALYSIS OF
FUNCTIONAL
GROUPS
UV light
LINK
Alkene Pathway 2
HCI or HBr or HI
Figure 9A–23 Two general pathways for the synthesis of primary amines from an alkane
(Pathway 1) and an alkene (Pathway 2)
Following the general sequence of Pathway 1, Figure 9A–24 shows a two-step sequence for
the preparation of ethanamine starting from ethane.
H
H H
C C
H
H
H H
Br2 NH3
H C C
H
Br
UV light
H
H
H
Substitution reaction Substitution reaction
N
Figure 9A–24 A two-step sequence for the preparation of ethanamine starting from ethane
H H
C C
H
H
H
H
Following the general sequence of Pathway 2, Figure 9A–25 shows a two-step sequence for
the preparation of propan-2-amine starting from propene.
C
H
C C
H
H
H
H
CI H
H NH2
HCI NH3 C C
H
C C
C
H
H
H
C H
H
H
H
H
H
H
Addition reaction Substitution reaction
Figure 9A–25 A two-step sequence for the preparation of propan-2-amine starting from propene
H
H
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
9A ORGANIC REACTIONS: SUBSTITUTION, ADDITION AND OXIDATION
349
Pathways to synthesise carboxylic acids
Carboxylic acids can also be produced from relatively simple starting materials via a
sequence of reactions. Figure 9A–26 shows two pathways to produce a carboxylic acid
starting from an alkane (Pathway 1) and an alkene (Pathway 2). Pathway 1 begins with
a substitution reaction of an alkane to give a haloalkane intermediate. Reacting the
haloalkane with aqueous sodium hydroxide in a second substitution reaction produces an
alkan-1-ol intermediate. Oxidation of the alcohol with either H+/MNO4
– or H+/Cr2O7
2–
produces the carboxylic acid. Pathway 2 begins with an alkene. After a hydration reaction,
the resulting alcohol intermediate intercepts Pathway 1. Oxidation of the alcohol produces
the carboxylic acid.
Pathway 1
Alkane
CI2 or Br2 OH–
Haloalkane
H+/MnO4
–
or
H+/Cr2O7
2–
Primary alcohol Carboxylic acid
UV light
Pathway 2
(Pathway 2)
Alkene
H2O, H3PO4
Heat
Figure 9A–26 Two general pathways to produce a carboxylic acid starting from an alkane (Pathway 1) and an alkene
Using the outline of Pathway 1, Figure 9A–27 below shows a three-step sequence to
prepare propanoic acid from propane.
H
H H
C
H
C C
H
H
H
H
H H
Cl2 NaOH(aq) H+/Cr2O72–
H C C
H
C
CI
H
H H
C C
H
C
O
UV light
H
H
H
H
H
H
Substitution
reaction
Substitution
reaction
Figure 9A–27 A three-step sequence to prepare propanoic acid from propane
H
H H
C C
H
H
C
O
O H
H
Oxidation
reaction
Using the outline of Pathway 2, Figure 9A–28 shows a two-step sequence to prepare
ethanoic acid from ethene.
H
H
C C
H H
H H
H2O H+/Cr2O72–
H C C
O
H3PO4, 300°C
H
H H
Addition reaction
Oxidation reaction
Figure 9A–28 A two-step sequence to prepare ethanoic acid from ethene
H O
H C
H
C
O H
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
350 CHAPTER 9 REACTIONS OF ORGANIC COMPOUNDS
Check-in questions – Set 3
Reagent(s)
Reagent(s)
Saturated
hydrocarbon 1 A reaction pathway to synthesise an amine is shown below.
Reaction 1
Haloalkane
+ HBr
Reaction 2
NH2
a Write the semi-structural formula of the saturated hydrocarbon.
b State the reagents and any reaction conditions required to convert the saturated
hydrocarbon to the haloalkane (reaction 1).
c State the reagents and any reaction conditions required to convert the haloalkane to
the primary amine (reaction 2).
2 The reaction pathway to generate a carboxylic acid is shown below.
C4H8
HCI
Compound A
Compound B
Reagent(s)
Primary alcohol
H+/MnO4–
WORKSHEET
9A–1
REACTIONS FOR
THE SYNTHESIS
OF PRIMARY
AMINES AND
CARBOXYLIC
ACIDS
Carboxylic acid
DOC
C4H8 reacts with HCl to form two unbranched isomers – compound A and compound B.
Only compound A can proceed to form a carboxylic acid.
a Identify the type of reaction that converts C4H8 into compound A.
b Draw the skeletal structure of compound B.
c State the reagent(s) required to convert compound A into a primary alcohol.
d Draw the structural formula of the carboxylic acid.
Designing a reaction pathway
Designing an efficient, cost-effective and environmentally sustainable reaction pathway
requires the consideration of multiple factors. A summary of some of these factors are
outlined in Table 9A–1.
Table 9A–1 Factors that influence the design of a reaction pathway
Factor Attributes
Reagent/starting material • Cheap
•
Readily available
•
Sourced from renewable feedstocks
•
Low toxicity – safety for the operators/scientists
Intermediate compounds • Stable – does not degrade after being formed
•
Easily isolated or purified from the reaction mixture
where possible
•
Low toxicity – safety for the operators/scientists
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
9A ORGANIC REACTIONS: SUBSTITUTION, ADDITION AND OXIDATION
351
Factor Attributes
Product •
•
•
•
•
Stable – does not degrade after being formed
Easily isolated from the reaction mixture
Can be obtained with a high degree of purity
Low toxicity where possible – safety for the operators/
scientists
Is of commercial value or serves an intended purpose
Waste/by-products • As few as possible
•
Toxicity and environmental impact are as low as possible
•
Have considered opportunities for waste to be used in other
chemical processes/manufacturing
•
Access to responsible waste disposal
Number of steps in the
sequence
•
As few as possible – fewer number of reactions usually
mean less overall waste generated and less energy and
reagents required
Overall yield of product • As high as possible – high yield means that the reactions in
the sequence are efficient and there is little starting material
left over or by-products being formed.
Reaction conditions • As mild as possible – extreme reaction conditions such as
high temperatures (above 100°C), low temperatures (below
0°C) and high pressures are energy intensive and costly to
maintain. Mild conditions such as room temperature and
atmospheric pressures are desirable.
Rates of reactions • Avoid extremely slow reactions as it will hold up (bottleneck)
the entire process.
VIDEO 9A–1
REACTION
PATHWAYS
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
352 CHAPTER 9 REACTIONS OF ORGANIC COMPOUNDS
9A SKILLS
VIDEO 9A–2
SKILLS: IDENTIFYING
THE BEST REACTANT
Identifying the best reactant for the job
You may encounter situations where you are asked to plan a synthesis of a particular
molecule. This is a skill that requires you to consider multiple scenarios to achieve an
outcome. For example, consider the equation below and identify the best reactant to
synthesise hexan-3-ol.
H2O
Reactant
H
H2SO4, 200°C
H
H
C C
H
H
OH
H
H
H
C C
H
H
C
H
C H
H
The way to address problems like this is to list all the possible candidates that can be used. The
reaction conditions suggest that an addition reaction is being conducted. Therefore, two alkenes fit the
requirements: hex-2-ene and hex-3-ene.
Since there is more than one possible answer, how do we decide which is the best reactant? To answer this
question, we consider if there are any differences in the outcomes of these two starting materials. Hex-
2-ene, a molecule that is not symmetric, would react with H2O to give two possible products: hexan-3-ol
(desired product) and hexan-2-ol (by-product) as shown in the following diagram.
H
H
H
H
H
H
OH
H
H
H
H
OH
H
H
H
H
H2O
H C C
C
C C
C
H
H
C C
C C
C
C H
+
H
C C
C C
C
C H
H2SO4, 200°C
H
H H
H H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
Hex-2-ene Product By-product
On the other hand, hex-3-ene is symmetric and therefore would react with H2O to form hexan-3-ol as the
only product.
H
H
H C C
C
H
H H
H
C C
H H
H
C
H
H2O
H
H
H2SO4, 200°C
H
H
C C
H
H
OH
H
C C
H
H
H
H
C
H
C H
H
Hex-3-ene Product
Through selection of more ideal starting materials, we can optimise reactions by reducing the number of
by-products formed and maximising the yield.
Section 9A questions
1 Use structural formulas to write equations for the following reactions.
a methane reacting with bromine under UV light
b 2-chlorobutane reacting with ammonia
c 1-bromopropane reacting with aqueous potassium hydroxide
2 Copy these diagrams and complete the following equations by drawing the missing
structure in the box.
I
a NaOH
+ NaI
b NH3 + HCl
Cl
c Cl2
(CH3)3CCH2Cl + HCl
UV light
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
9A ORGANIC REACTIONS: SUBSTITUTION, ADDITION AND OXIDATION
353
3 Explain the difference between a substitution reaction and an addition reaction in terms
of changes made to the reactant.
4 Write the IUPAC name and the semi-structural formula of the product(s) formed when
but-2-ene reacts with:
a chlorine.
b water in the presence of phosphoric acid at 250°C.
c hydroiodic acid (HI).
d hydrogen gas in the presence of palladium metal.
5 Write an equation for the reaction between pent-2-ene and HBr. Use skeletal formula
for all organic molecules and show all possible products formed during the reaction.
6 The reaction pathway to synthesise a primary amine is shown below.
Starting material
Cl2 UV light
Compound A
Cl
Reagent(s)
Primary amine
a Draw the skeletal formula of the starting material.
b Draw the skeletal formula of compound A.
c State the name of the type of reaction that converts the starting material to
compound A.
d State the reagent(s) required to convert the chloroalkane to the primary amine.
e Draw the skeletal structure of the primary amine.
7 The reaction pathway to synthesise a carboxylic acid is shown below.
C3H6
Reagent(s)
250°C
Primary alcohol
H+/
K2Cr2O7
Compound B
Carboxylic acid
a Write the reagents required to convert C3H6 into a primary alcohol and compound B.
b Write the semi-structural formula of compound B.
c Write the semi-structural formula of the carboxylic acid.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
354 CHAPTER 9 REACTIONS OF ORGANIC COMPOUNDS
9B Organic reactions: condensation
and hydrolysis
Study Design:
•
Organic reactions and pathways, including
equations, reactants, products, reaction conditions
and catalysts (specific enzymes not required):
– synthesis of primary haloalkanes and primary
alcohols by substitution
– addition reactions of alkenes
– the esterification between an alcohol and a
carboxylic acid
– hydrolysis of esters
– pathways for the synthesis of primary amines
and carboxylic acids
– transesterification of plant triglycerides using
alcohols to produce biodiesel
– hydrolytic reactions of proteins, carbohydrates
and fats and oils to break down large biomolecules
in food to produce smaller molecules
– condensation reactions to synthesise large
biologically important molecules for storage as
proteins, starch, glycogen and lipids (fats and oils)
Glossary:
α-Glucose
Amylose
Carbohydrate
Catalysis
Condensation reaction
Disaccharide
Esterification reaction
Fatty acid
Glycerol
Glycogen
Glycosidic bond
Hydrolysis reaction
Lipid
Monosaccharide
Peptide
Polysaccharide
Protein
Saponification reaction
Starch
Transesterification
Triglyceride
ENGAGE
Are my lollies made from real fruit?
The answer is, generally, no.
But, as always, there are certain
exceptions. The food industry
does not have to use real fruit
to make their lollies smell and
taste like fruit. The biochemistry
of how the receptors in our
mouth and nose interact with
molecules is extremely complex.
For example, pentanoic acid
(C4H9COOH) has a foul odour
that is reminiscent of dirty socks.
But if pentanoic acid is heated with ethanol, a pleasant apple-like aroma emerges. The
product of this reaction is ethyl pentanoate and, like many other esters, it has a sweet
fruity scent that is desirable to our senses. Ethyl pentanoate is added to food items like
lollies and chewing gum to give them their distinct flavour and scent. Many other esters
are also used as food additives to give the product a desirable smell or taste.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
9B ORGANIC REACTIONS: CONDENSATION AND hyDROLySIS
355
EXPLAIN
Condensation reactions
Condensation reactions are a type of chemical reaction in which two molecules combine
to form a larger molecule, along with the simultaneous release of a small molecule such
as water (Figure 9B–1). The small molecule is considered a by-product of the reaction.
Condensation reactions are commonly used to form esters, amides, proteins and
carbohydrates. The products of condensation reactions are not only crucial for the normal
function of our bodies but also widely used in the materials and pharmaceutical industries.
H
OH + + H2O
Condensation
Reactant A Reactant B Product
reaction
Figure 9B–1 General process of a condensation reaction
Esterification reactions
A carboxylic acid and an alcohol can undergo a condensation reaction to form an ester
and a molecule of water. Heat and an acid catalyst such as H2SO4 are commonly used to
increase the rate of the reaction. Condensation reactions that form esters are also called
esterification reactions. An example is shown in Figure 9B–2 in which propanoic acid reacts
with ethanol to give ethyl propanoate and water.
H H O
H H
H H
O
H C C
C +
O
C C
H
H2SO4
Heat
H H
H +
C C
C
O H
H
O
C C
H
H H
H H
H H
H H
Figure 9B–2 The esterification reaction between propanoic acid and ethanol produces ethyl
propanoate and water.
Condensation
reaction
a type of chemical
reaction where
two molecules
combine to form
a larger molecule
with the release of
a small molecule,
usually water
Protein
a polymer that
consists of amino
acids linked by
peptide bonds
Carbohydrate
a sugar or a
saccharide,
ranging from
simple sugars
(monosaccharides)
to complex sugars
(polysaccharides)
LINK
8D FUNCTIONAL
GROUPS:
ALDEHYDES,
KETONES,
CARBOXYLIC
ACIDS AND
ESTERS
H2O
Esterification
reaction
a type of
condensation
reaction that forms
an ester from a
carboxylic acid
and an alcohol
Worked example 9B–1: Drawing an esterification reaction
An ester was prepared by reacting ethanoic acid with methanol in the presence of
H2SO4. The reaction was heated to 80°C for 16 hours.
VIDEO
WORKED EXAMPLE
9B–1
Using structural formulas for all organic compounds, draw an equation to describe the reaction above.
Solution
Logic Process
Step 1 Draw the
structures of the
reactants on the
left of the arrow.
H O
H C
H
C +
O H
O
H
H
C
H
H
Step 2 Recall that
a carboxylic
acid and an
alcohol react in
a condensation
reaction to form
an ester and a
molecule of water.
H O
H C
H
C +
O H
O
H
H
C
H
H
Ester +
H2O
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
356 CHAPTER 9 REACTIONS OF ORGANIC COMPOUNDS
Step 3 Identify the atoms
in the reactants
that will form the
water molecule.
H O
H C
H
C +
O H
O
H
H
C
H
H
Ester +
H2O
Step 4 Draw the
structure of
the ester using
the remaining
atoms of the two
reactants.
H O
H C
H
C +
O H
O
H
H
C
H
H
H
H C
H
C
O
O
H
C
H
+
H2O
H
Step 5 Complete the
equation by
adding the
catalyst and/
or any relevant
reaction
conditions.
H O
H C
H
C +
O H
O
H
H
C
H
H2SO4
H
80°C, 16 h
H
H C
H
C
O
O
H
C
H
+
H2O
H
Lipid
a substance
found in living
systems that is
derived from fatty
acids. Common
examples include
fats and oils
Catalysis
a process in
which a catalyst
is used to speed
up a reaction
Triglyceride
an organic
compound in
which the three
hydroxyl groups
of glycerol form
esters with
three fatty acid
molecules
Fatty acid
a compound
consisting of a
carboxyl group
with a long non-
polar hydrocarbon
chain, which
can either be
saturated or
unsaturated
Glycerol
a compound
containing three
hydroxyl groups,
with the chemical
formula C3H8O3
Condensation reactions to form large biologically important molecules
Condensation reactions are important in the synthesis of large biologically important
molecules such as lipids, proteins and carbohydrates. These molecules are made by living
organisms for the long-term storage of energy, structural support, catalysis and signalling.
Synthesis of lipids
Lipids are an important class of molecules in our bodies. They make up our cell membranes
and are used for fat storage. A particular type of lipids are the triglycerides, more commonly
known as fats and oils. Fats and oils are part of a healthy diet, and it is essential for our
bodies to have a storage of fat as a source of energy. The structure of a triglyceride consists
of three ester functional groups and three long hydrocarbon chains derived from fatty acids
(Figure 9B–3). The non-polar fatty acid chains make triglycerides insoluble in water.
Carboxyl group (–COOH)
polar region
Ester functional
groups (–COO)
Hydroxyl
groups (–OH)
O
Some fatty acids are
saturated, while others
are unsaturated
OH
OH
Non-polar
O O
region
O
Enzyme
O
HO
+ 3 + 3H2O
Fatty acid
O
OH
Glycerol
C3H8O3
O
Triglyceride
Figure 9B–3 The condensation reaction between glycerol and stearic acid (C17H35COOH) gives the
corresponding triglyceride and three molecules of water.
Synthesis of triglycerides involves condensation of three fatty acid molecules with a glycerol
molecule. These three fatty acid molecules do not necessarily have to be identical. For each
triglyceride, three water molecules are formed as the by-product. In biological systems,
enzymes are used to catalyse this reaction.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
9B ORGANIC REACTIONS: CONDENSATION AND hyDROLySIS
357
H
H
Synthesis of proteins
The basic building blocks for proteins are 2-amino acids (also referred to as α-amino acids).
Each 2-amino acid contains a carboxyl functional group and an amino functional group.
These two functional groups are part of the backbone of the amino acid. Each 2-amino acid
also has a unique R-group that depends on the identity of the amino acid. Our bodies can use
any of the twenty 2-amino acids to construct protein molecules. A full list of these 2-amino
acids along with their names and three-letter codes is available in the VCE Chemistry Data
Book. The general amino acid structure and three examples are shown in Figure 9B–4.
OH
COOH
Amine
group
R group
Carboxyl
group
CH2
CH3
H2C
H2C
R
H
O
O
H
O
H
O
N C
C
N C
C
N C
C
N C
C
H
OH
OH
H
OH
H
OH
H
General structure
of 2-amino acids
H
Alanine
Ala
H
Tyrosine
Tyr
H
Glutamic acid
Glu
Figure 9B–4 Structure, name and three-letter code of selected 2-amino acids. These 2-amino acids
are some of the twenty 2-amino acids used by our body to synthesise proteins.
The condensation reaction to form peptides involves the carboxylic acid group of one
2-amino acid reacting with the amino group of another 2-amino acid (Figure 9B–5). As a
result, amide bonds, or peptide bonds, are formed between the 2-amino acids. A molecule
of water is also generated for each peptide bond that is formed. In a living organism, this
reaction occurs at ribosomes.
OH
Amide bond or
peptide bond
Reaction 1
CH3
CH3
H2C
O
O
H
O
H
N C
H
C
N C
C
OH
H
OH
H
H
N C
H
C
Alanine Tyrosine
LINK 12B ENZYMES
NOTE
The ‘2’ in 2-amino acids refers to the location of the amino functional group in the structure.
The –NH2 group is always bonded to the second carbon.
The structures of all 20 2-amino acids are given in your VCE Chemistry Data Book. It is important
that you are familiar with how to access this information and the layout of the information.
Peptide
a short sequence
of 2-amino acids
joined by peptide
bonds. Two
2-amino acids
joined together
by a peptide
bond is called
a dipeptide;
three 2-amino
acids make a
tripeptide. A
longer sequence
is called a
polypeptide.
Proteins are
polypeptides
containing tens
or thousands of
2-amino acids
OH
H
H
+
H2C
N C
H
H
Dipeptide
C
O
OH
+
H2O
C
O
OH
+
Reaction 2 OH
COOH
OH
COOH
CH2
CH2
CH3
H2C
CH3
H2C
H2C
H2C
O
O
H
O
N C
C
H
OH
H
O
H
N C
C
+ + N C
H
OH
H
O
H
C
N C
C N C
C
N C
OH
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
Glutamic acid
Alanine
Tyrosine
Tripeptide
Figure 9B–5 2-Amino acids undergo condensation reactions to form peptides. Reaction 1 shows a
possible reaction between alanine and tyrosine to form a dipeptide. Reaction 2 shows a possible
reaction between glutamic acid, alanine and tyrosine to form a tripeptide.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
2H2O
α-Glucose
a form of glucose in
which the hydroxyl
group on carbon
1 is on the same
side of the six-
membered ring as
the hydroxyl group
on carbon 4
Monosaccharide a
single sugar unit
Disaccharide
a compound
consisting of two
sugar units linked
by a glycosidic
bond
Polysaccharide
a compound
consisting of many
sugar units linked
by glycosidic bonds
Starch
a polysaccharide of
α-glucose joined by
glycosidic bonds.
Starch is made by
plants as a storage
of energy
Glycogen
a highly branched
polysaccharide of
α-glucose joined
by α-1,4-glycosidic
bonds and α-1,6-
glycosidic bonds.
Glycogen is made
by animals as a
storage of energy
4
OH
Glycosidic bond
the C–O–C linkage
between two
monosaccharide
units; also called
an ether bond
358 CHAPTER 9 REACTIONS OF ORGANIC COMPOUNDS
Synthesis of carbohydrates
Carbohydrates refer to a broad class of molecules based on sugar molecules like glucose.
The cyclic structure of α-glucose consists of a six-membered ring and five hydroxyl
groups (Figure 9B–6). A simple sugar molecule like α-glucose is often referred to as a
monosaccharide. Just like the relationship between 2-amino acids and peptides, molecules
of sugar can also condense to form disaccharides and polysaccharides. Large complex
carbohydrates such as starch and glycogen consist of thousands of glucose units. These
polysaccharides are important for short-term storage of energy in living organisms.
CH2OH
OH
O
O
HO
OH
=
OH
OH
HO
OH
OH
OH
Figure 9B–6 Different ways to represent α-glucose. The structure on
the left shows the relative positions of the hydroxyl functional groups
on glucose, whereas the structure on the right is a more accurate
representation of the molecular shape of glucose.
Disaccharides are formed by the condensation reaction of two monosaccharides. As shown
in Figure 9B–7, the reaction between two α-glucose molecules forms a disaccharide and
a molecule of water. The new bond formed between the two sugar molecules is called a
glycosidic bond. Notice that the glycosidic bond is formed between the hydroxyl group
on carbon 1 of the first α-glucose molecule and the hydroxyl group on carbon 4 of the
second α-glucose molecule. We can be more specific and describe this glycosidic bond as
an α-1,4-glycosidic bond. There are other types of glycosidic bonds, as we’ll see later.
α-1,4-glycosidic bond
CH2OH
6
6 CH2OH
CH2OH
CH2OH
O
O
O
O
5
5
1
1
41
4
+
OH
OH
OH
2
OH
HO
2
OH
OH
O
OH + H2O
OH
3
3
OH
OH
OH
OH
α-glucose α-glucose Disaccharide of α-glucose
Figure 9B–7 Condensation reaction of two α-glucose molecules to give a disaccharide and water
Condensation can occur between hundreds of α-glucose molecules to form a
polysaccharide called amylose, a type of starch. Starch molecules are made by plants as a
way to store energy. Notice, in Figure 9B–8, that the α-glucose units in amylose combine in
a continuous linear structure without any branching. This is because the glycosidic bonds
in amylose are predominantly α-1,4-glycosidic bonds.
Amylose
a type of starch
made from
α-glucose units
bonded to each
other through
α-1,4-glycosidic
bonds
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
9B ORGANIC REACTIONS: CONDENSATION AND hyDROLySIS
359
Enzyme
CH2OH
OH
CH2OH
CH2OH
O
O
O
n
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
O
O
OH
OH
OH
n – 2
α-glucose Amylose
n = a whole number between 300 and 600
Figure 9B–8 Condensation of α-glucose molecules to give amylose, a linear form of starch
Glycogen is another polysaccharide of glucose. Compared to amylose, the structure
of glycogen is highly branched. This is because a mixture of α-1,4-glycosidic bonds
and α-1,6-glycosidic bonds exist within glycogen. Notice that glucose units with both
α-1,4-glycosidic bonds and α-1,6-glycosidic bonds form the intersection of a branch.
Animals synthesise glycogen as a storage of energy. The reason for the extensive branching
in the structure will become apparent when we discuss hydrolysis of carbohydrates.
CH2OH
O
OH + (n – 1)H2O
OH
OH
α-1,6-glycosidic bond
α-1,4-glycosidic bonds
Figure 9B–9 The highly branched structure of glycogen, in which α-glucose units form both
α-1,4-glycosidic bonds and α-1,6-glycosidic bonds
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
360 CHAPTER 9 REACTIONS OF ORGANIC COMPOUNDS
Check-in questions − Set 1
1 Draw all the products formed during the following condensation reactions, in the
appropriate format.
a O
b
c
OH
+
OH
CH2OH
O
OH
OH
CH2
H2SO4
HO
CH2OH
O
+ Enzyme
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
HO
CH3
CH
H
O
H
O
N C
C
+
N C
C
H
OH
H
OH
H
H
Hydrolysis
reaction
a type of
chemical
reaction
involving the
addition of
water to break a
larger molecule
into smaller
products; hydro
refers to ‘water’,
lysis refers to
‘breaking apart’
Saponification
reaction
a reaction that
hydrolyses an
ester under
basic conditions
Hydrolysis reactions
Hydrolysis reactions involve the use of water to break a larger molecule into smaller
products. The hydro portion of the name refers to ‘water’ and the lysis part refers
to ‘breaking apart’. Hydrolysis is the reverse process or the backwards reaction of a
condensation reaction.
+
OH
H2O H+
Hydrolysis reaction
Reactant Product A Product B
Figure 9B–10 General process for a hydrolysis reaction
Hydrolysis of esters
6A WHAT IS
EQUILIBRIUM?
LINK
Esters can be hydrolysed using water in the presence of a NaOH or KOH catalyst. This
reaction is also called a saponification reaction. The products are a carboxylic acid and an
alcohol. As an example, Figure 9B–11 shows the hydrolysis reaction of propyl butanoate
to produce butanoic acid and propan-1-ol. Excess water is typically used in hydrolysis
reactions to push the reaction to completion.
H
H
H
O
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
C C
C
C C
O
NaOH
O
C C
C H
+
H2O
H
C C
C
C C
+
O
C C
C H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H O
H
H
H
H
H
Figure 9B–11 Base hydrolysis of propyl butanoate catalysed by NaOH to produce butanoic acid and propan-1-ol
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
9B ORGANIC REACTIONS: CONDENSATION AND hyDROLySIS
361
Hydrolysis of food molecules
The food we consume is broken down by our bodies via a series of chemical reactions.
Hydrolysis is one of the first transformations to affect chemical compounds in our food.
Our bodies produce a variety of enzymes to speed up the hydrolysis process.
Hydrolysis of fats and oils (lipids)
The triglyceride molecules we consume are hydrolysed in our bodies into glycerol and fatty
acids (Figure 9B–12). Special enzymes in the digestive system, such as lipase, help speed up
this process. Subsequently, the glycerol and fatty acid molecules can supply our bodies with
energy. Outside of our bodies, triglycerides can also be saponified using the same reaction
conditions that would normally hydrolyse an ester.
O
O
O
Enzyme
or
NaOH
OH
O
OH
+ 3
O
+ 3H2O
HO
OH
O
O
Figure 9B–12 Equation showing the hydrolysis of triglyceride molecules to give glycerol and fatty
acids. This reaction can be catalysed by enzymes or by using NaOH.
Hydrolysis of proteins
A variety of food items, including eggs, fish, meat, legumes and dairy, provide us with a
rich source of proteins. Once these foods are consumed, the body begins to hydrolyse the
polypeptide molecules into smaller peptides and 2-amino acids via hydrolysis reactions.
Again, enzymes in the body, such as trypsin and pepsin, have been specifically designed
to carry out this reaction. The 2-amino acids from the hydrolysis reaction can be used for
energy or building blocks for the body’s own proteins. Peptides can also be hydrolysed by
boiling in a strong aqueous acid, such as HCl.
C–N bond from the amide functional
group is broken during the reaction
OH
OH
CH3
H2C
O
H
O
N C
C
N C
C
+
H2O
Enzyme
or
HCI, heat
H
OH
H
H
H
H
H
CH3
N C
H
C
O
OH
+
H
H
H2C
N C
H
C
O
OH
OH
Enzyme
or
HCI, heat
H
H
H2C
N C
H
COOH
CH
CH3
O
O
C N C
C
H
H
H2C
N C
H
H
C
OH
O
OH
+
2H2O
H2C
N C
H
COOH
CH2
O
C
OH
CH3
H
O
+ +
N C
C
H
OH
H
Figure 9B–13 Equations showing the hydrolysis of peptide molecules to give amino acids. This
reaction can be catalysed by enzymes or by using HCl(aq) with heat.
H
H
H
H
H2C
N C
H
C
O
OH
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
362 WORKSHEET
9B–1
CONDENSATION
AND
HYDROLYSIS
REACTIONS
1B PRODUCTION
OF CHEMICAL
ENERGY IN
NATURE
Enzyme
+ H2O 2
CH2OH
OH
OH
Enzyme
OH
CHAPTER 9 REACTIONS OF ORGANIC COMPOUNDS
DOC
LINK
OH
O
OH
Hydrolysis of carbohydrates
Hydrolysis of stored starch or glycogen produces glucose molecules, which living organisms
use for energy (ATP) production in cellular respiration. Again, specific enzymes are
responsible for speeding up the hydrolysis reaction in biological systems.
CH2OH
CH2OH
CH2OH
O
O
O
OH
OH
OH
OH
O
OH
OH
OH
OH
α-glucose
Disaccharide
n – 2
CH2OH
CH2OH
CH2OH
O
O
O
OH
OH
+ (n + 1)H2O (n + 2)
OH
O
O
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
Amylose
n
α-glucose
Figure 9B–14 Equations showing the hydrolysis of a disaccharide (top) and polysaccharide
(bottom) to give monosaccharides
These enzymes work by hydrolysing the glucose unit at the termini (plural of terminus) of
the polysaccharide structure. Glycogen, which has a branched structure, has significantly
more termini than the linear structure of amylose. Consequently, the structure of
glycogen allows a greater number of hydrolysis reactions to occur simultaneously,
releasing glucose at a faster rate than amylose. This is an important distinction because
animals have the need to perform energy-intensive tasks, such as running, swimming or
comprehending a chemistry textbook.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
9B ORGANIC REACTIONS: CONDENSATION AND hyDROLySIS
363
Transesterification reactions
Synthesising biodiesel from plant-based triglycerides utilises a reaction called
transesterification. Transesterification involves reacting an ester with an alcohol in the
presence of a base to form a new ester. The alcohol becomes the new alkyl group on the
ester product. In the case of producing biodiesel, a triglyceride molecule (usually sourced
from oils and fats from plants and animals) reacts with a small alcohol, such as methanol or
ethanol, to give an ester of a fatty acid (biodiesel) and glycerol. If methanol is used, a fatty
acid methyl ester is produced and if ethanol is used, a fatty acid ethyl ester is produced. A
typical reaction to synthesise biodiesel involves adding the plant oil to a solution of NaOH
in methanol. The NaOH acts as a catalyst in the reaction.
LINK 1A
TYPES OF FUELS
Transesterification
a reaction
involving an
ester and an
alcohol to form
a new ester. The
alcohol involved
becomes the
new alkyl group
of the ester
product
H
H C H C
O
O R1
C OH
CH2
O
C
O R2
O
C
O R3
CH3
O
C
O R1
CH
OH
3CH3OH+ +
NaOH
catalyst
CH3
O
C
O R2
H C
H
CH2
OH
CH3
O
C
O R3
Methanol
Glycerol
Ester functional
group –COO R represents
a hydrocarbon chain of
varying length
Mixture of methyl
esters (biodiesel)
Methyl
Figure 9B–15 Transesterification reaction between a triglyceride and methanol,
producing a mixture of esters, or biodiesel
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
364 CHAPTER 9 REACTIONS OF ORGANIC COMPOUNDS
9B SKILLS
Focus on the functional groups and simplifying the problem
Drawing the product of a condensation reaction can be challenging if complex
starting materials are involved. An example of this is drawing a dipeptide product
VIDEO 9B–1
SKILLS: FOCUS ON
THE FUNCTIONAL
GROUPS
from two amino acids. The way to address this is to focus on the relevant functional
groups (carboxyl and amino) and ignore the extra complexities in the amino acids. Below is an approach to
tackle such a question.
O
NH2
C
OH
CH2
CH2
CH2
O
N C
C
+
N C
C
OH
H
H
H
H
O
OH
H
H
Step 1 Identify the carboxyl and
amino groups that will
react.
H
H
OH
CH2
N C
H
C
O
OH
+
H
H
O
NH2
CH2
CH2
N C
C
H
O
OH
Step 2 Recall that a carboxylic
acid and an amine
react in a condensation
reaction to form a
dipeptide and a molecule
of water.
H
H
OH
CH2
N C
H
C
O
OH
O
NH2
CH2
H
CH2
+ Dipeptide + H2O
N C
C
H
O
OH
H
Step 3 Identify the atoms in the
reactants that will form
the water molecule and
write H2O on the product
side of the equation.
H
H
OH
CH2
N C
H
C
O
OH
O
NH2
CH2
CH2
H
O
+ Dipeptide + H2O
N C
C
H
OH
H
Step 4 Draw the structure of
the dipeptide using the
remaining atoms of the
two reactants. Recall that
only the functional groups
involved in the reaction
(red) will change. The
majority of the structure
(black) can be copied
directly from the starting
amino acids.
H
H
OH
CH2
N C
C
H
O
OH
+
H
H
O
NH2
CH2
CH2
N C
C
H
O
OH
H
H
OH
CH2
O
N C
C
H
O
NH2
CH2
CH2
N C
C
H
H
O
OH
+ H2O
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
9B ORGANIC REACTIONS: CONDENSATION AND hyDROLySIS
365
Section 9B questions
1 Esters can be used to add flavour to a food. The structure of an ester that has a fruity
scent is shown below.
O
O
H2SO4
O
Give the name and draw the structures of the two organic compounds used to produce
this ester.
2 Draw all products of the following reactions.
a
OH
+
HO H2SO4
b
+
HO
OH
3 Complete the equations of the following hydrolysis reactions.
a
H
H
O
H H
H
C C
C O
C C
H
H
H
H
C
H
H
C
H
H
b
O
O
+ +
4 Draw the structure of the two different triglycerides that can be formed from the
following condensation reaction.
OH
OH
+ +
2 CH3(CH2)10COOH CH3(CH2)7CH CH(CH2)7COOH
H
+ +
OH
5 Draw the structural formula of the products in the following reaction.
O
NH2
C
CH2
HO
CH3
CH2
CH
O O O
CH2 HCI
C
N C N C
C
C
N
C
H2O+
Heat
OH
H
H
H H
H
H
H
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
366 CHAPTER 9 REACTIONS OF ORGANIC COMPOUNDS
6 A sample of a protein isolated from egg white needs to be hydrolysed to analyse its
amino acid composition. In a high school laboratory, the specific enzymes required to
hydrolyse the peptide are not available.
a Describe an experiment you could conduct to hydrolyse the protein.
b Determine the number of amino acids in the protein if 0.0134 mol of the protein
reacted with 0.2412 mol of water during the hydrolysis.
7 Table sugar, or sucrose, is a disaccharide with the structure shown below.
CH2OH
CH2OH
O
OH
O
OH
OH
O
CH2OH
OH
OH
a Circle the glycosidic bond in sucrose.
b Draw the products of the hydrolysis reaction of sucrose.
8 During the synthesis of biodiesel, it is important to make sure that the reagents are
not contaminated with water. This is because a by-product would form if water was
introduced to the reaction.
a What is the functional group found in the by-product?
b What type of reaction caused the by-product to form?
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
9C SUSTAINABLE PRODUCTION OF ORGANIC COMPOUNDS
367
9C Sustainable production of organic
compounds
Study Design:
•
Calculations of percentage yield and atom
economy of single-step or overall reaction
pathways, and the advantages for society and
for industry of developing chemical processes
with a high atom economy
•
The sustainability of the production of
chemicals, with reference to the green
chemistry principles of use of renewable
feedstocks, catalysis and designing safer
chemicals
Glossary:
Actual yield
Green chemistry
Hazardous substance
Limiting reagent (or reactant)
Percentage atom economy
Percentage yield
Renewable feedstock
Stoichiometric
Theoretical yield
Waste
ENGAGE
Valuable natural products
Many organic compounds that are used in everyday products, such as plastics and
pharmaceuticals, can be produced using sustainable methods. Identifying and using
renewable feedstocks, such as plant biomass and waste materials, is a key driver of
sustainability. Curcumin, sourced from the spice turmeric, is an example of an organic
compound with medicinal properties that can be sourced from a renewable feedstock.
There is some evidence to indicate that it has a variety of potential health benefits,
including anti-inflammatory and anticancer effects, but research is ongoing. It could be
used as a natural remedy for a range of conditions, such as inflammation and arthritis.
Alternatively, it can also be synthesised using green chemistry techniques to reduce the
use of hazardous chemicals and waste generation. As a result, curcumin is an example
of a potentially valuable medicinal compound that can be sustainably produced from a
renewable source.
Figure 9C–1 Powder from the spice turmeric contains the medicinal
compound curcumin.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
368 CHAPTER 9 REACTIONS OF ORGANIC COMPOUNDS
Percentage yield
a measure of
the amount of
product obtained
as a percentage
of the theoretical
maximum
amount of
product that
could be
obtained from a
reaction
Percentage atom
economy
the measure of
the percentage
of the atoms in
the reactants
that are
incorporated
into the desired
product
6C LE
CHÂTELIER’S
PRINCIPLE
LINK
Actual yield
the actual
quantity of
product obtained
from a reaction
EXPLAIN
Evaluating the efficiency of reactions and pathways
Evaluating the outcome of a reaction is an important part of performing any reaction. After
all, it would be pointless and even wasteful to start a reaction without assessing its results.
At times, this assessment may simply involve making observations to gain an experience.
Other times, specific measurements and data are collected in a scientifically rigorous
manner to evaluate the efficiency of a reaction. Percentage yield and percentage atom
economy are two separate measurements that contribute to determining whether a reaction
is efficient at producing the intended product in a cost-effective and sustainable manner.
Percentage yield
Recall that reactions do not always proceed until all reactants are converted to products.
In fact, most reactions reach a dynamic equilibrium where the reaction vessel contains a
mixture of reactants and products. A method to evaluate whether the reaction is efficient
at producing the desired product is to determine its percentage yield. The percentage yield
of a chemical reaction is a measure of the amount of the actual yield as a percentage of the
theoretical yield. This is summarised in the formula below.
Percentage yield = actual yield
× 100
theoretical yield
The actual yield is the quantity of product that is obtained from the reaction. This is
quoted as either the mass, usually in grams, or amount, in mol, of product. The theoretical
yield is the maximum quantity of product that can be obtained if all the limiting reagent
(or reactant) is converted to the product. The theoretical yield is calculated using the
stoichiometry of the reaction.
The following worked examples demonstrate how to determine and apply percentage yield
of reactions in different scenarios.
VIDEO
WORKED
EXAMPLE 9C–1
Worked example 9C–1: Calculating the percentage yield when the
mass of reactant is known
A 45 g sample of ethanol was oxidised to ethanoic acid using acidified KMnO4. The
product was purified by distillation and had a mass of 38 g. Calculate the percentage
yield of this oxidation reaction.
Solution
Theoretical yield
the theoretical
maximum
quantity of
product that
could be
obtained from a
reaction if all the
limiting reagent
is converted to
the product
Limiting reagent
(or reactant)
the reagent that
is completely
used up in a
reaction and
therefore limits
the amount of
product that can
be formed
Logic Process
Step 1 Write an equation for the
reaction. H+/KMnO4
CH3CH2OH CH3COOH
Note that it is not always necessary to fully
balance the equation. In this case, it is sufficient
to just balance the carbon atoms on both sides
of the equation. The equation shows a 1:1 ratio
of reactant to product.
Step 2 Determine the amount,
in mol, of the reactant. n(CH3CH2OH) = m
M
45 g
=
46 g mol–1
= 0.98 mol
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
9C SUSTAINABLE PRODUCTION OF ORGANIC COMPOUNDS
369
Step 3 Use the mole ratio to
determine the amount, in
mol, of product that could be
obtained if all the reactant is
converted to product.
n(CH3COOH) = 1
1 × n(CH3CH2OH)
= 0.98 mol
Step 4 Determine the mass of the
product in Step 3. This is the
theoretical yield.
m(CH3COOH) = n × M
= 0.98 mol × 60 g mol–1
= 58.7 g
Step 5 Calculate the percentage
yield. Percentage yield = actual yield
theoretical yield
38 g
=
× 100
58.7 g
= 65%
× 100
Worked example 9C–2: Calculating the mass of product when the percentage
yield is known
VIDEO
WORKED
EXAMPLE 9C–2
The addition reaction between but-2-ene and Br2 has a 93.0% yield. If 35.0 g of but-2-ene
was added to excess Br2, calculate the mass of the product obtained.
Solution
Logic Process
Step 1 Write an equation for the
reaction.
CH3CHCHCH3 + Br2 → CH3CHBrCHBrCH3
Step 2 Determine the amount, in
mol, of the reactant. n(CH3CHCHCH3) = m
M
35.0 g
=
56.0 g mol–1
= 0.625 mol
Step 3 Use the mole ratio to
determine the amount,
in mol, of product that
could be obtained if all
the reactant is converted
to product.
n(CH3CHBrCHBrCH3)
1
=
1 × n(CH3CHCHCH3)
= 0.625 mol
Step 4 Determine the mass of
the product in Step 3.
This is the theoretical
yield.
m(CH3CHBrCHBrCH3) = n × M
=
 0.625 mol × 215.8 g mol–1
= 135 g
Step 5 Calculate the actual yield. Actual yield = Percentage yield
100 × theoretical yield
Actual yield = 93.0%
100% × 135 g
= 125 g
m(CH3CHBrCHBrCH3)actual = 125 g
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
370 CHAPTER 9 REACTIONS OF ORGANIC COMPOUNDS
VIDEO
WORKED
EXAMPLE 9C–3
The percentage yield can also be determined for a multi-step reaction pathway. In this case,
the percentage yields of each individual step are multiplied to give the overall percentage
yield of the entire pathway. This means that the yield of every step influences the overall
percentage yield. A single low-yielding reaction in a sequence can drastically affect the
amount of product that is formed at the end. Furthermore, given that actual yields are
always less than 100%, long sequences usually suffer from poor overall percentage yield
of product.
Worked example 9C–3: Calculating the overall percentage yield
A reaction pathway for the synthesis of propanoic acid is shown below. Given the percentage yields of each
individual step stated below the arrows, calculate the overall percentage yield of the sequence.
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
Cl2
NaOH
H+/Cr2O7
2–
O
H
C
C
C H
H
C
C
C Cl
H
C
C
C O
H
C
C
C
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
72%
H H O H
H
H
Solution
UV light
29%
89%
Logic Process
Step 1 Recall that the individual percentage
yields of each step are multiplied
together to obtain the overall
percentage yield of the pathway.
Overall percentage yield = 29
100
= 19%
89
72
×
×
× 100
100
100
Waste
unwanted
substances
that have no
further value in
production
Percentage atom economy
Designing reactions that produce less waste or no waste is an essential goal of green
chemistry. By-products formed during a reaction contribute to the waste that may need
to be processed and disposed of at the end of a reaction. Atom economy is one way
of evaluating the amount of potential by-products that could form during a reaction.
Percentage atom economy is the measure of the percentage of the atoms in the reactants
that are incorporated into the desired product. One of the aims of designing a green
process is to maximise atom economy so that the product accounts for as much of the
material added to the reaction as possible. A reaction with high atom economy would
generate fewer by-products and, by extension, less waste. The illustration in Figure 9C–2
compares reactions with high versus low atom economy.
High atom
economy
+
+
+
Low atom
economy
+
+
Reactants
Desired product Waste
Figure 9C–2 Illustration of reactions with high and low atom economy
NOTE
Waste may include by-products from a reaction, contaminated solvents after a reaction,
unreacted starting materials that are uneconomical to reclaim or excess products that are not
needed further down the production line.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
9C SUSTAINABLE PRODUCTION OF ORGANIC COMPOUNDS
371
Atom economy can be calculated by dividing the total molar mass of the desired product
by the molar mass of all reactants, then expressed as a percentage. The equation below
summarises this process.
Percentage atom economy = molar mass of desired product
×100 × 100
molar mass of all reactants
Given that mass is conserved in all reactions, we can assume that the mass of all products
equals the mass of all reactants. Therefore, the alternative equation for atom economy is:
molar mass of desired product
Percentage atom economy = percentage atom economy =
×100 × 100
mol ar mass of all products
It is worthwhile noting that reagents that remain chemically unchanged at the end of a
reaction are not included in the calculation of atom economy. This includes substances like
solvents and catalysts.
Worked example 9C–4 demonstrates a calculation of percentage atom economy of a
given reaction.
Worked example 9C–4: Calculating percentage atom economy
VIDEO
WORKED
EXAMPLE 9C–4
The following reaction is used to synthesise propan-1-amine from 1-chloropropane.
Calculate the percentage atom economy of the reaction.
H
H
H
H
H
H
C
C
C Cl +
NH3
H
C
C
H
H
H
H
H
HCl
H
C NH2 +
H
Solution
Logic Process
Step 1 Calculate the total molar
mass of all products.
M(CH3CH2CH2NH2) + M(HCl) = 59.0 + 36.5
= 95.5 g mol–1
Step 2 Calculate the molar mass of
the desired product.
M(CH3CH2CH2NH2) = 59.0 g mol–1
Step 3 Calculate percentage atom
economy. Percentage atom economy = 59 g mol–1
95.5 g mol–1
= 61.8%
× 100
A similar procedure can be used to calculate the atom economy of a reaction pathway. In
this case, the reactants added at each step need to be clearly identified. It is important to
only account for the reactants added after the first step so that the main organic compound
is not double-counted at each subsequent step.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
372 CHAPTER 9 REACTIONS OF ORGANIC COMPOUNDS
VIDEO
WORKED
EXAMPLE 9C–5
Worked example 9C–5: Calculating the percentage atom economy of
a reaction pathway
Calculate the percentage atom economy of the reaction pathway shown below.
H
H
C
H
H
C H
H
Br2
H
H
C
H
H
C Br
H
NH3
H
H
C
H
UV light
H
C N
H
H H
Solution
Logic Process
Step 1 Identify all added
reactants in the
sequence.
H
H
C
H
H
C H
H
Br2
H
UV light
H
C
H
H
C Br
H
NH3
H
H
C
H
H
C N
H
H H
Step 2 Calculate the total
molar mass of all
added reactants.
M(CH3CH3) + M(Br2) + M(NH3) = 30 + 159.8 + 17
= 206.8 g mol–1
Step 2 Calculate the
molar mass of the
desired product.
M(CH3CH2NH2) = 45.0 g mol–1
Step 3 Calculate
percentage atom
economy.
Percentage atom economy = 45.0 g mol–1
206.8 g mol–1
= 21.8%
× 10
Check-in questions – Set 1
WORKSHEET
9C–1
CALCULATING
PERCENTAGE
YIELD AND
PERCENTAGE
ATOM ECONOMY
DOC
1 A 56 g sample of ethanoic acid reacted with excess ethanol in the presence of H2SO4
catalyst according to the reaction shown below. The reaction produced 42 g of ethyl
ethanoate.
H O
H
H
O
H2SO4
H C
C +
H C
C
O
H H
H +
C
C
O H
H
O
C C
H
H
H
H
H
H H
a Calculate the percentage yield of the reaction.
b Calculate the percentage atom economy of the reaction.
2 The reaction pathway to synthesise dichloromethane is shown below.
H
H
Cl
H
C
H
Cl2
H H C Cl
UV light
75%
H
Cl2
UV light
46%
H
C
Cl
H
a Calculate the overall percentage yield of the reaction pathway.
b Calculate the overall percentage atom economy for the reaction pathway.
H2O
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
9C SUSTAINABLE PRODUCTION OF ORGANIC COMPOUNDS
373
Applying green chemistry principles to sustainable chemical
production
A sustainable chemical process is one that minimises environmental impact and
consumption of non-renewable resources while maintaining or improving the economic
and social benefits associated with the product. Towards this end, Paul Anastas and John
Warner published the 12 principles of green chemistry in 1998. The main concept behind
these green chemistry principles is to use our knowledge, skills and creativity in the field of
chemistry to reduce or eliminate the use and production of hazardous substances. In turn,
continuous improvement in manufacturing processes would minimise threats to our health
and reduce the impact on the environment and other living organisms.
Green chemistry
the design
of chemical
products and
processes
that reduce
or eliminate
the use and
generation
of hazardous
substances
Hazardous
substance
a substance that
can cause harm
to your health or
the environment
1. Waste
prevention
2. Atom
economy
4. Design
safer
chemicals
5. Safer
solvents and
auxiliaries
3. Less
hazardous
chemical
syntheses
6. Design
for energy
efficiency
7. Use
renewable
feedstocks
10. Design for
degradation
8. Reduce
derivatives 9. Catalysis
11. Real-
time analysis
for pollution
prevention
12. Inherently
safer chemistry
for accident
prevention
Figure 9C–3 The 12 principles of green chemistry proposed by Anastas and Warner
When applying green chemistry to achieve sustainability in organic synthesis, we strive to:
• use renewable feedstocks where possible.
• use catalysis to reduce or eliminate by-products and decrease the energy demands of the
reaction.
• design safer chemicals that have low toxicity to humans and other living organisms and
low impact on the environment.
Use of renewable feedstocks
As discussed in Chapter 4, renewable feedstocks are resources that can be replenished
at a faster rate than they are consumed. Using renewable feedstocks, such as biomass
derived from plant, animal or waste materials, in chemical production can provide several
advantages over traditional petrochemical feedstocks. These include:
• reducing dependence on finite, non-renewable resources.
• reducing the amount of waste produced since many renewable feedstocks are by-products
of other industries.
• creating economic growth opportunities in rural areas where the agricultural feedstocks
are grown and processed.
LINK 1A
TYPES OF FUELS
Renewable
feedstock
raw material that
is used to supply
an industrial
process and
can be readily
replenished
LINK 4A FUEL CELLS
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
374 CHAPTER 9 REACTIONS OF ORGANIC COMPOUNDS
UNIT 1
7A FEATURES
OF ELECTROLYTIC
CELLS
9B ORGANIC
REACTIONS:
CONDENSATION
AND HYDROLYSIS
1A TYPES OF FUELS
LINK
LINK
LINK
LINK
However, it is important to note that there are also challenges associated with using
renewable feedstocks, such as scalability, consistency, cost-competitiveness and
agriculture’s impact on the environment. Additionally, the sustainability benefits of
renewable feedstocks depend on the specific feedstock and how it is produced, processed
and transported.
An example of using renewable feedstocks in the production of organic compounds is the
conversion of triglycerides, which are sourced from animal fat or plant oil, to give biodiesel.
The specific transesterification reaction involved in this process was discussed in Section 9B.
Another example is the synthesis of bioethanol from corn or sugar cane feedstocks.
Agricultural production of sugar cane takes less than one year from seed. Upon harvesting,
the glucose from the feedstock can be converted to bioethanol, which is a versatile chemical
with applications as a fuel, solvent, cleaning agent, antiseptic and other industrial uses.
Sugar cane
seed 1 year
C6H12O6
Glucose
2C2H5OH + 2CO2
Bioethanol Carbon
dioxide
5B FACTORS
AFFECTING
REACTION
RATE
LINK
Stoichiometric
the quantity of
reagents, as a
molar ratio, as
prescribed by
the balanced
equation of a
reaction
Sugar cane
Figure 9C–4 Production of bioethanol from sugar cane, a renewable feedstock
Catalysis
As discussed in Chapter 5, catalysis is the process of using a catalyst to increase the rate of
a chemical reaction. In most catalytic reactions, only a small amount of catalyst is required
to speed up the transformation because the catalyst is not consumed during the reaction.
In contrast, reactions that are not catalysed require stoichiometric reagents to affect the
chemical change and/or require higher temperature and pressure to drive the reaction
forwards. In summary, catalysis is an important part of sustainable production of organic
compounds because it has the potential to:
• reduce the energy demand of conducting a reaction.
• reduce the time required to obtain products.
• reduce the amount of waste generated upon completion of a reaction.
Furthermore, the development of new catalysts enables new reaction pathways that may
have been too slow or ineffective in the past to become commercially viable. Such an
advancement allows us to build complex molecular structures with fewer reaction steps,
achieve higher atom economy and use less energy or hazardous substances compared
to existing technologies. An example of this is the synthesis of ibuprofen, an anti-
inflammatory medicine. The industrial production of ibuprofen in 1961 by the Boots
Pure Drug Company required six steps using stoichiometric reagents (Figure 9C–5). The
sequence suffers from low atom economy and uses various hazardous substances like
aluminium trichloride (AlCl3) to effect the chemical transformations.
Advancements in catalysis enabled a more efficient sequence to be developed in 1992 by
the Hoechst Company. Beginning with the same starting material, the newer sequence
takes advantage of two catalytic reactions to build the same ibuprofen product in just three
steps. In comparison with the earlier process, the Hoechst Company process has higher
atom economy, generates less waste and recycles the hydrogen fluoride (HF) used in the
first step for use in subsequent batches. Examples like this demonstrate how catalysis can
make our chemical manufacturing greener and more sustainable.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
9C SUSTAINABLE PRODUCTION OF ORGANIC COMPOUNDS
375
O
Ac2O, HF
Ac2O, AlCl3
Step 1
Step 1
Starting material
Hoechst Company
process
Boots Pure Drug
Company process
Step 2
H2
Raney-Ni
(catalyst)
Step 2
Step 3
OH
O
KOtBu
O
Cl
O
O O
O
H3O+
heat
O
Catalysis
Step 4
NH2OH
CO
Pd
(catalyst)
Step 3
Step 5
Ac2O
N
N
OH
–OH heat
O
O
OH
Step 6
O
Ibuprofen
Figure 9C–5 Two alternative synthetic pathways to synthesise ibuprofen. The green pathway by
Hoechst Company features two catalytic steps to produce the desired product in a total of three
steps. In contrast, the orange pathway by Boots Pure Drug Company involves six steps using
stoichiometric reagents.
Designing safer chemicals
Designing safer chemicals is one of the 12 principles of green chemistry and an important
aspect of achieving sustainable chemical manufacturing. Certain chemicals are safe to
handle, while others are more toxic to humans and animals or have a greater impact on the
environment. Towards this end, reactions and processes should be designed to reduce or
eliminate the use and production of hazardous chemicals. Some of the strategies to achieve
this include:
• use less toxic or non-toxic starting materials and reagents
• develop reactions that produce less by-products (high atom economy) or non-toxic
by-products
• design chemicals that break down into non-toxic or less toxic substances to reduce their
impact on the environment
• explore structurally similar compounds that can serve the same purpose with less toxicity.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
376 CHAPTER 9 REACTIONS OF ORGANIC COMPOUNDS
An example of using a structurally related substance as a replacement for a toxic compound
is toluene. The structure and reactivity of a compound are the main determinants of its
toxicity. Certain structures can interact with enzymes, receptors or molecules in our body
leading to adverse effects. Traditionally, benzene was used as a common solvent in many
organic reactions. However, the frequency of its use has diminished when it was discovered
that benzene oxidised in the liver to form a carcinogen that led to leukaemia, a cancer of the
blood cells (Figure 9C–6). We can avoid benzene’s toxic effects by using toluene, a viable
replacement in most cases. Compared to benzene, toluene has an extra methyl group. The
added methyl group in toluene means that its oxidation in the liver produces benzoic acid, a
non-toxic compound.
Through understanding how reactions work, the by-products that are formed and how
molecules interact with living organisms, we can design safer reactions and produce
safer chemicals. This would not only benefit our lives but also the lives of all other living
organisms and the environment that we all inhabit.
Oxidation in
O
the liver Leukemia
O
Benzene A carcinogen
Oxidation in
O
OH
the liver Not toxic
Toluene Benzoic acid
Figure 9C–6 Comparison of toxic effects of benzene and toluene in our body
VIDEO 9C–1
SKILLS: A DEEPER
DIVE INTO
ATOM ECONOMY
9C SKILLS
A deeper dive into atom economy
A part of the current Study Design requires you to address ‘the advantages for society
and for industry of developing chemical processes with a high atom economy’. This
necessitates you having the skill to link the concept of atom economy to broader
contexts from society and industry. While processes with high atom economy generate
fewer by-products, you may need to incorporate more depth in your responses should
the question demand it.
For example, consider the question:
Explain why chemical processes with higher atom economy are beneficial to the
environment.
A simple response such as ‘Processes with high atom economy generate fewer
by-products’ would unlikely afford you full marks.
To access all available marks, you may need to consider why generating fewer
by-products during manufacturing of organic compounds is a beneficial trait.
For example:
Reactions that have high atom economy produce fewer by-products. This means that less
waste is generated and disposed of into the environment, reducing the environmental
impact of running the reaction.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
9C SUSTAINABLE PRODUCTION OF ORGANIC COMPOUNDS
377
Some other advantages of high atom economy are summarised in the table below. You
and your peers may be able to collaboratively think of more. Applying them in a suitable
context is a skill you should continue to practise.
Table 9C–1 Advantages of reactions with high percentage atom economy
Advantage Explanation
Less environmental impact Reactions that have high percentage atom economy
produce fewer by-products. This means that less waste is
generated and disposed of into the environment, reducing
the environmental impact of running the reaction.
Better safety By-products formed during a reaction may potentially
be toxic to humans. Handling the waste after a reaction
and transporting it to a waste facility are also potential
hazards. Therefore, reactions that produce fewer by-
products are likely to be safer to conduct.
Reduced cost Using reactions with high percentage atom economy
is one of the ways to save on the costs associated with
an industrial process. This is because reactions with
high atom economy generate less waste, which in an
industrial process is associated with the need for frequent
equipment cleaning, maintenance and disposal of waste.
Therefore, high atom economy may reduce the overall
cost of producing the desired product.
Better quality of product Reactions with high percentage atom economy form
fewer by-products, which may potentially lead to products
of higher quality. The product formed during the reaction
needs to be separated from any by-products that are also
formed. Forming fewer by-products leads to a simpler
separation process, resulting in a higher purity of the
desired product.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
378 CHAPTER 9 REACTIONS OF ORGANIC COMPOUNDS
Section 9C questions
Reaction 1 CH3CH3
1 During a hydrolysis reaction, 93 g of butyl ethanoate reacted to give 22 g of ethanoic
acid. Calculate the percentage yield of the reaction.
2 Chloromethane and bromomethane are two molecules that can be produced from
methane via a substitution reaction.
a In each case, calculate the percentage atom economy of the reaction.
b Why is there a difference seen between the percentage atom economy of the
two processes?
3 Bromoethane can be synthesised from two different reactions, as shown below.
Br2
UV light
86%
CH3CH2Br
HBr
83%
a Calculate the percentage atom economy of each reaction.
b If a percentage yield of 86.0% can be achieved for Reaction 1, calculate the mass of
product if 100 g of CH3CH3 was reacted.
c From a sustainability perspective, which reaction is preferred when synthesising
bromoethane? Explain your choice.
4 The reaction pathway to synthesise ethanamine is shown below.
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
C
C
H
H
Br2
H H C
UV light
79%
H
NH3
C Br
H
C
C
N
H
H
H
Reaction 2 CH2CH2
50%
H
H
a Calculate the overall percentage yield of the reaction pathway.
b Determine the percentage atom economy of the reaction sequence.
5 Define ‘percentage atom economy’ and explain why manufacturing processes with high
percentage atom economy are potentially safer for the workers at a chemical plant.
6 Renewable feedstock, such as sugar cane, can be converted to ethanol, a valuable
industrial chemical. Research two other renewable feedstocks and the product(s)
derived from them.
7 How does catalysis contribute to sustainable chemical manufacturing?
8 How can improving the catalyst used for a reaction lead to a more sustainable
manufacturing process?
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
379
Chapter 9 review
Summary
Create your own set of summary notes for this chapter, on paper or in a digital document. A model
summary is provided in the Teacher Resources and can be used to compare with yours.
Checklist
In the Interactive Textbook, the success criteria are linked from the review questions and will be
automatically ticked when answers are correct. Alternatively, print or photocopy this page and tick
the boxes when you have answered the corresponding questions correctly.
Success criteria – I am now able to: Linked questions
9A.1 9A.2 9A.3 9A.4 9A.5 9B.1 9B.2 9B.3 9B.4 9C.1 9C.2 9C.3 9C.4  Classify the type of reaction (substitution, addition or oxidation)
when given an equation or a description of the reaction
 Write the equations (including reactants, products, reaction
conditions and catalysts) of substitution reactions to synthesise
primary haloalkanes and primary alcohols
 Write the equations (including reactants, products, reaction
conditions and catalysts) of addition reactions of alkenes
 Write the equations (including reactants, products, reaction
conditions and catalysts) of oxidation reactions to synthesise
carboxylic acids
 Draw reaction pathways (including reactants, intermediate
compounds, products, reaction conditions and catalysts) to
synthesise carboxylic acids or amines
 Classify the type of reaction (condensation, hydrolysis or
transesterification) when given an equation or a description
of the reaction
 Write the equations (including reactants, products, reaction conditions
and catalysts) of condensation reactions to synthesise esters and other
biologically important molecules (proteins, starch, glycogen and lipids)
 Write the equations (including reactants, products, reaction
conditions and catalysts) of hydrolysis reactions to convert esters
and other biologically important molecules (proteins, starch,
glycogen and lipids) into smaller molecules
 Write the equations (including reactants, products, reaction
conditions and catalysts) of transesterification reactions to convert
plant triglycerides into biodiesel
 Calculate the overall percentage yield of a reaction or a reaction pathway  Calculate the overall percentage atom economy of a reaction or a
reaction pathway
 Discuss the advantages of developing chemical processes with a
high percentage atom economy
 Discuss how the sustainable production of chemicals can be
achieved through the application of green chemistry principles
2☐, 6☐
6☐, 11☐
1☐, 2☐, 7☐,
11☐
3☐, 10☐
10☐, 16☐
12☐, 15☐
5☐, 11☐, 12☐
4☐, 11☐, 13☐
15☐
9☐, 16☐
8☐, 14☐
14☐, 16☐
14☐, 15☐
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
380
Multiple-choice questions
1 Which of the following can convert an alkene to an alkane?
A H2O
B HCl
C KMnO4
D H2
2 Consider the following equation:
CH2CH2 + H2O → CH3CH2OH
This reaction is an example of
A a condensation reaction.
B a substitution reaction.
C an addition reaction.
D a hydrolysis reaction.
3 Which of the following is converted to hexanoic acid by acidified potassium dichromate?
A hexan-1-ol
B hexan-1-amine
C 1-chlorohexane
D methyl hexanoate
4 Which of the following is converted to hexanoic acid by treatment with aqueous sodium
hydroxide?
A hexan-1-ol
B hexan-1-amine
C 1-chlorohexane
D methyl hexanoate
5 An ester with the formula CH3CH2COOCH2CH3 is made from
A propanol and propanoic acid.
B propanol and ethanoic acid.
C ethanol and propanoic acid.
D ethanol and ethanoic acid.
6 Which of the following is a substitution reaction?
A C3H7Cl → C3H6
B C3H7Cl → C3H6Cl2
C C3H6 → C3H8O
D C3H6 → C3H8
7 An alkene with the molecular formula C5H10 was reacted with H2 in the presence of a Ni
catalyst. The product was 2-methylbutane. Which one of the following could not be the alkene?
A CH2C(CH3)CH2CH3
B CH3CH2C(CH3)CH2
C (CH3)2CCHCH3
D CH3CHCHCH2CH3
8 Methane and chlorine react to produce trichloromethane according to the following equation.
CH4 + 3Cl2 → CHCl3 + 3HCl
The percentage atom economy of the reaction is
A 7%
B 52%
C 77%
D 87%
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
381
9 Excess acidified potassium permanganate was used to oxidise 1.50 g of propan-1-ol. After the
reaction mixture was purified, 0.78 g of propanoic acid was obtained. The percentage yield of
the reaction is
A 42%
B 44%
C 52%
D 64%
10 The following reaction pathway is used to make a carboxylic acid.
Ethene X Y
Ethanol Ethanoic acid
The reagents X and Y, respectively, are
A acidified KMnO4 and water/catalyst.
B NaOH and acidified KMnO4.
C water/catalyst and acidified KMnO4.
D HCl and water/catalyst.
Short-answer questions
11 Write a balanced equation for the reaction of the following substances. Show any relevant
reaction conditions and/or catalysts required for the reaction.
a but-1-ene + Cl2
b propane + Br2 c ethene + H2 d 1-iodobutane + NH3 e methanol + 2-methylpropanoic acid f butyl ethanoate + H2O (base hydrolysis) 12 Glycogen is a highly branched polysaccharide of α-glucose. The structure of α-glucose is
shown below.
(1 mark)
(1 mark)
(1 mark)
(1 mark)
(1 mark)
(1 mark)
CH2OH
OH
O
OH
OH
OH
a Draw the structure of a disaccharide of α-glucose with an α-1,4-glycosidic bond. b Draw the structure of a disaccharide of α-glucose with an α-1,6-glycosidic bond. c What type of reaction converts α-glucose into a disaccharide? 13 A section of a protein is shown below.
OH
O OH
C
CH2
CH2
O
H3C CH3
O
CH2 CH
C CN
N
C C N C C
H
H
H H H H
a How many amino acid units are shown in the section of the protein? b Circle all peptide bonds shown in the section of the protein. c Give the names of the amino acids in the section of the protein. d If the protein consisted of 81 amino acid units, calculate the mass of water
required to fully hydrolyse 0.0035 mol of the protein. (1 mark)
(1 mark)
(1 mark)
O
(1 mark)
(1 mark)
(1 mark)
(2 marks)
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
382
Enzyme
Corn 14 Plant-based biomass, such as corn, can be converted to bioethanol, a valuable fuel source and
industrial solvent. A summary of the process is given below.
CH2OH
O
OH
2CH3CH2OH + 2CO2
OH OH
OH
a Select a specific part of the process and explain how it relates to a green
chemistry principle and sustainable production of chemicals. b Discuss a potential disadvantage of using corn as a feedstock. (3 marks)
(2 marks)
c Calculate the percentage atom economy of the reaction that converts glucose
into bioethanol. (2 marks)
d Explain why manufacturing processes with higher percentage atom economy
are potentially more environmentally friendly. (2 marks)
15 Linolelaidic acid is a molecule found in processed vegetable oil. Its structure is shown below.
O
OH
a Draw the structure of the triglyceride formed from linolelaidic acid. (1 mark)
b Draw an equation showing the conversion of the triglyceride in part a to a
biodiesel using methanol. (2 marks)
c What type of reaction is outlined in part b? (1 mark)
d An alternative to biodiesel is petrodiesel, a resource obtained from fossil fuels.
From a sustainability perspective, describe the advantages of using biodiesel
over petrodiesel. (2 marks)
16 The reaction pathway shown below was used to synthesise ethyl pentanoate.
Compound A
H2O
H3PO4
35%
60%
Compound B
Pentan-2-ol
H+/K2Cr2O7
80%
Pentanoic acid
X 74%
Ethyl pentanoate
a Give the semi-structural formula of compound A. b Draw the structural formula of compound B. (1 mark)
(1 mark)
c Name the type of reaction that converts pentanoic acid to ethyl
pentanoate (marked by X). (1 mark)
d Give the reagents required to convert pentanoic acid to ethyl pentanoate
(marked by X). (1 mark)
e Calculate the overall percentage yield of converting compound A to
ethyl pentanoate. (2 marks)
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
383
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
384
UNIT
4
HOW ARE CARBON-BASED COMPOUNDS DESIGNED
FOR PURPOSE?
CHAPTER
10
LABORATORY ANALYSIS
OF ORGANIC COMPOUNDS
Introduction
In Area of Study 1 for Unit 4, you learned about organic compounds, the
different types of organic compounds and the different types of reactions to
synthesise organic compounds. In this chapter, you will explore how to analyse
the products of these reactions using various experimental techniques. You
will start by investigating qualitative techniques that are used to test for the presence
of various functional groups. This will be followed by examining procedures that
determine the purity of these organic compounds. To conclude, you will revisit the
topic of volumetric analysis with a focus on redox titrations for the calculation of
unknown concentrations.
Curriculum
Area of Study 2 Outcome 2
How are organic compounds analysed and used?
Study Design: Learning intentions – at the end of the chapter I will
be able to:
INTRODUCTION
VIDEO
LABORATORY
ANALYSIS
OF ORGANIC
COMPOUNDS
• Qualitative tests for the
presence of carbon–carbon
double bonds, hydroxyl and
carboxyl functional groups
• Measurement of the
degree of unsaturation of
compounds using iodine
10A 10A.1 10A.2 10A.3 10A.4 10A.5 10A.6 10A.7  Analysis of functional groups
 Explain how qualitative tests can be used to determine
the presence of carbon–carbon double bonds
 Explain how qualitative tests can be used to
determine the presence of hydroxyl functional groups
 Explain how qualitative tests can be used to
determine the presence of carboxyl functional groups
 Design experimental methods to test for carbon–
carbon double bonds, and hydroxyl and/or carboxyl
functional groups
 Determine the presence of carbon–carbon double
bonds, and hydroxyl and/or carboxyl functional
groups through analysing experimental data
 Describe how a redox titration with iodine can be
used to determine the number of carbon–carbon
double bonds in a molecule
 Calculate the number of carbon–carbon double
bonds in an unsaturated hydrocarbon
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
385
Study Design: Learning intentions – at the end of the chapter I will
be able to:
•
•
Applications and principles
of laboratory analysis
techniques in verifying
components and purity
of consumer products,
including melting point
determination and
distillation (simple and
fractional)
Volumetric analysis,
including calculations
of excess and limiting
reactants using redox
titrations (excluding
back titrations)
10B  Analysis of purity and concentration
10B.1  Define ‘purity’
10B.2  Describe how the melting point of a consumer
product can help determine the identity and purity of
a consumer product
10B.3 10B.4  Compare simple and fractional distillation
 Draw a diagram of the experimental setup for simple
and fractional distillation
10B.5  Explain how simple distillation can be used to verify
the components and purity of a consumer product
10B.6  Explain how fractional distillation can be used to
verify the components and purity of a consumer
product
10B.7  Define ‘end point’ and ‘equivalence point’
10B.8  Describe the use of an indicator in an redox titration
10B.9  Define ‘standard solution’
10B.10  State the key characteristics of a primary standard
solution
10B.11  List the steps involved in a redox titration, including
glassware involved
10B.12  Calculate the concentration of an unknown solution
from given experimental data
VCE Chemistry Study Design extracts © VCAA; reproduced by permission.
Glossary
Analyte
Baeyer’s test
Concordant
End point
Equivalence point
Free radical
Melting point
Monounsaturated
Polyunsaturated
Purity
Qualitative
Quantitative
Standard solution
Titrant
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
386 CONCEPT MAP
Concept map
10A Analysis of functional groups
Qualitative tests to determine the presence
of carbon-carbon double bonds and
hydroxyl and carboxyl functional groups
10B Analysis of purity and concentration
Experimental techniques, including distillation,
melting point determination and volumetric
analysis, to determine purity and concentration
Thermometer
Cooling
water out
Cooling
water in
Condenser
Round bottom flask
Distillate
Hotplate
See the Interactive Textbook for an interactive version of this concept map
interlinked with all concept maps for the course.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
10A ANALYSIS OF FUNCTIONAL GROUPS
387
10A Analysis of functional groups
Study Design:
• Qualitative tests for the presence of carbon–carbon
double bonds, hydroxyl and carboxyl functional groups
• Measurement of the degree of unsaturation of
compounds using iodine
Glossary:
Baeyer’s test
Free radical
Monounsaturated
Polyunsaturated
Qualitative
Quantitative
ENGAGE
Functional groups all around us
Ant bites. Vinegar. Aspirin. Lemon juice. Vitamin C. What do they all have in
common? Interestingly, they all contain different compounds that are all linked by being
carboxylic acids. In this section, we will focus on the carboxyl functional group that forms
carboxylic acids, as well as two other functional groups – the carbon–carbon double bond
and the hydroxyl group – and the qualitative tests that can be used to identify them.
Figure 10A–1 Compounds containing the carboxyl functional group are found in many situations,
such as formic acid in ant bites (left), 2-acetoxybenzoic acid in aspirin (centre), citric acid and
ascorbic acid in oranges and lemons (right).
EXPLAIN
Qualitative versus quantitative
No doubt you’ve heard the terms qualitative and quantitative in previous years of science
when analysing various forms of data. In this section, the tests presented to check for
the presence of carbon–carbon double bonds, hydroxyl and carboxyl functional groups
are all qualitative. This means data that are discrete or categorical and are a description
of the results observed. In Section 10B, you will look at volumetric analysis of organic
compounds, which results in numerical values being obtained. This is an example of
quantitative data.
Qualitative
the non-numerical
characterisation
of a substance
or sample based
on its observable
properties
LINK
10B ANALYSIS
OF PURITY AND
CONCENTRATION
NOTE
A way to remember the difference between qualitative and quantitative is to think of the
‘l’ in qualitative as meaning ‘language’ and the ‘n’ in quantitative as meaning ‘numerical’.
Alternatively, quantitative is derived from the word ‘quantity’ so is therefore finding a
measurable quantity.
Quantitative
the numerical
determination
of the quantity
or concentration
of a substance
or component in
a sample
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
388 CHAPTER 10 LABORATORY ANALYSIS OF ORGANIC COMPOUNDS
8B MOLECULES
OF CARBON
LINK
9A ORGANIC
REACTIONS:
SUBSTITUTION,
ADDITION AND
OXIDATION
9A ORGANIC
REACTIONS:
SUBSTITUTION,
ADDITION AND
OXIDATION
LINK
LINK
9A ORGANIC
REACTIONS:
SUBSTITUTION,
ADDITION AND
OXIDATION
LINK
Free radical
a short-lived
uncharged
molecule with an
unpaired valence
electron
Qualitative tests for carbon–carbon double bonds
In Section 8B, you learned about the difference between alkanes and alkenes. As a reminder,
the main difference is that alkanes are saturated, whereas alkenes are unsaturated. In
terms of alkenes, this means that the family is characterised by the presence of one or
more carbon–carbon double bonds. We can see this difference illustrated by the structural
formulas of ethane and ethene in Figure 10A–2.
H
H
H
H
C
C
H
C C
H
H
H
H
Figure 10A–2 Structural formulas of
ethane (left) and ethene (right) show that
ethene is characterised by the presence
of a carbon–carbon double bond.
There are a number of instances where it may be important to test a sample to identify
whether it contains an alkane or an alkene. In particular, this can be useful when
analysing whether a hydrogenation reaction converting an alkene to an alkane has gone to
completion. One laboratory technique to achieve this is known as the bromine test.
Bromine test
The bromine test works on the principle that alkanes and alkenes react differently in the
presence of halogens. Let’s focus on how ethane and ethene would react with bromine.
H
H
Br
H
H
C
C
UV light
+
H H
BrBr +
C
C
H
H Br
H
H
H
H
UV light
ethane bromine bromoethane bromide
+
+
H
Br
Br
C C
+
Br Br H
C
C
H
H
H
H
H
ethene bromine 1,2-dibromoethane
+
Figure 10A–3 The reactions of ethane (top) and ethene (bottom)
with bromine
It can be seen from the equations that the biggest difference in the reactions is the
conditions required for the reaction to occur. Due to the presence of the reactive carbon–
carbon double bond, ethene is able to react easily with bromine in an addition reaction.
However, the alkane is less reactive and so the reaction can only take place in the presence
of UV light. The UV light forms reactive bromine free radicals, which can then replace a
hydrogen atom on the ethane via a substitution reaction.
Let’s now investigate how the bromine test takes advantage of this difference to allow us to
detect the presence of carbon–carbon double bonds.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
10A ANALYSIS OF FUNCTIONAL GROUPS
389
Figure 10A–4 When a reaction takes
place, the bromine solution changes
from a yellow-orange colour (left)
to colourless (right). This forms the
basis of the bromine test.
At room temperature, bromine is often used dissolved in water. This is due to the very
toxic, corrosive and environmentally hazardous nature of pure bromine liquid. Bromine
water is a yellow-orange colour. However, when bromine water reacts with either an alkane
or an alkene, the yellow-orange colour disappears and the solution becomes colourless
(Figure 10A–4). This allows for a qualitative way to determine whether or not a reaction
has occurred.
So how does this help us determine whether or not the substance is an alkane or an alkene,
or to put it another way, whether there is a carbon–carbon double bond present? We can
answer this by looking at a flow chart of possible results (Figure 10A–5). Here it can be seen
that the bromine solution will only change from yellow-orange to colourless in the dark if a
carbon–carbon double bond is present. If the solution remains yellow-orange in the dark, it
can be moved into the light, where it should then become colourless. This acts as a control
to indicate that an alkane is present and not that the reaction has failed.
Sample stays
yellow-orange
NO ALKANE
OR ALKENE
PRESENT
Sample stays
yellow-orange
Sample moved
to light
Samples
placed in dark
Sample goes
colourless
ALKANE
(C C)
Sample goes
colourless
ALKENE
(C C)
Figure 10A–5 The possible results of the outcome of the bromine test for the presence of a
carbon–carbon double bond
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
390 CHAPTER 10 LABORATORY ANALYSIS OF ORGANIC COMPOUNDS
Baeyer’s test
Another qualitative test that can be performed to detect the presence of a carbon–carbon
double bond, in order to distinguish between alkanes and alkenes, is known as Baeyer’s test.
Similar to the bromine test, Baeyer’s test is based on observing a colour change that occurs
if a chemical reaction occurs. In this instance, the reaction involves mixing the alkane or
alkene with potassium permanganate, which is purple in colour. When a reaction takes
place, manganese(IV) oxide is formed, which appears black (or brown) in colour. However,
not only is there a discolouration (from purple to colourless), but the manganese(IV)
oxide forms a solid precipitate. The combination of observing the precipitate and the
discolouration indicates that a reaction has occurred.
Baeyer’s test
a test for an
unsaturated
carbon–carbon
bond, such as
an alkene
NOTE
Baeyer’s test will detect any species that oxidises in solution, including both hydroxyl and
carbonyl functional groups, which are discussed later in the section. Therefore, this test is of
limited value unless it is known that the species being tested are hydrocarbons.
MnO4
–(aq)
(purple)
Let’s look at the reactions that would occur in the Baeyer’s test, using the same examples of
ethane and ethene (Figure 10A–6).
H
H
H
H
H
C
C
H H
+ +
MnO4
–(aq)
C
C
H
(purple)
H
H
H
H
No reaction
H
OH
C
C3 3
+ 4H2O(aq) + 2MnO4
–(aq) H2C
2
(purple)
CH2
+ 2OH–(aq) + 2MnO2(s)
(black-brown)
H
H
OH
(colourless)
Figure 10A–6 The reactions of ethane (top) and ethene (bottom) that would occur in the Baeyer’s test.
Ethane doesn’t react and the tube stays purple, whereas ethene will oxidise to ethane-1,2-diol, which
is colourless, and manganese dioxide, which is black (or brown).
We can summarise the results of this test by generating another flow chart, as shown in
Figure 10A–7.
Hydrocarbon sample
remains purple
(no reaction)
ALKANE
(C C)
Hydrocarbon sample
mixed with potassium
permanganate
Discolouration
(from purple to clear)
(reaction occurs)
ALKENE
(C C)
Figure 10A–7 The
possible results of
the outcome of the
Baeyer’s test for the
presence of a carbon–
carbon double bond
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
10A ANALYSIS OF FUNCTIONAL GROUPS
391
Quantitative analysis of carbon–carbon double bonds
If you’ve paid attention to commercials discussing fats in food products, you have probably
heard the terms monounsaturated and polyunsaturated. These terms refer to how many
carbon–carbon double bonds are present in the fat: monounsaturated fats have a single
carbon–carbon double bond, whereas polyunsaturated fats have multiple carbon–carbon
double bonds.
It is possible to determine the number of carbon–carbon double bonds in a molecule by
performing an addition reaction with iodine. This reaction occurs similarly to the one that
was described in the bromine test, however, iodine (I2) is used in place of bromine. An
example reaction with ethene is shown in Figure 10A–8.
Monounsaturated
an organic
compound that
contains one
carbon–carbon
double bond
Polyunsaturated
an organic
compound that
has two or more
C
C double
bonds or C C
triple bonds
l l H
H
H
C C
+
I
C
I
C
H
H
H
H
H
ethene iodine 1,2-diiodoethane
+
Figure 10A–8 An addition reaction between ethene and
iodine to produce 1,2-diiodoethane
LINK
9A ORGANIC
REACTIONS:
SUBSTITUTION,
ADDITION AND
OXIDATION
From Figure 10A–8, we can observe that the addition reaction occurs in a mole ratio of
1 : 1 between carbon–carbon double bonds and iodine. This means that we can use the
mole ratio of any given reaction to tell us how many carbon–carbon double bonds exist.
As an example, if hydrocarbon X contained two carbon–carbon double bonds, we would
need twice as many moles of iodine to react completely with it (that is, our carbon–carbon
double bond to iodine ratio would be 1 : 2).
Before we go through a worked example of one of these calculations, we must first
understand how to determine when this reaction has gone to completion. The principle
behind this is similar to the bromine test in that a colour change is observed. Iodine, which
in schools is typically dissolved in acetic acid (also known as Hanus solution) is an orange-
red colour. However, when it reacts with the hydrocarbon, the iodide ion (I–) is colourless.
To determine the amount of iodine required, the reaction is conducted by repeatedly
adding small amounts of Hanus solution to the hydrocarbon until the orange-red colour
completely disappears. This is an example of a redox titration, which you will learn more
about in Section 10B.
LINK
10B ANALYSIS
OF PURITY AND
CONCENTRATION
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
392 CHAPTER 10 LABORATORY ANALYSIS OF ORGANIC COMPOUNDS
VIDEO
WORKED
EXAMPLE 10A–1
Worked example 10A–1: Using the mole ratio to determine the number of
carbon–carbon double bonds in an unknown hydrocarbon
A 6.90 g sample of an unknown hydrocarbon (M = 138 g mol–1) reacts completely
with 25.38 g of iodine (I2). How many carbon–carbon double bonds are present in the
hydrocarbon?
Solution
Logic Step 1 Process
Calculate the amount, in mol, of each
reactant.
n(hydrocarbon) = m
M
= 6.90 g
138 g mol–1
n(hydrocarbon) = 0.0500 mol
n(I2) = m
M
= 28.38 g
253.8 g mol–1
n(I2) = 0.1000 mol
Step 2 Determine the mole ratio of the reactants. n(hydrocarbon) : n(I2)
= 0.0500 mol : 0.1000 mol
n(hydrocarbon) : n(I2)
= 1 : 2
Step 3 State the number of carbon–carbon
double bonds present.
As two moles of iodine are required
to react completely with one mole of
the hydrocarbon, there must be two
carbon–carbon double bonds present
in the unknown hydrocarbon.
8C FUNCTIONAL
GROUPS:
HALOALKANES,
AMINES AND
ALCOHOLS
LINK
Qualitative tests for hydroxyl functional groups
What are hydroxyl functional groups?
Recall from Section 8C that a hydroxyl functional group is –OH bonded to a hydrocarbon
chain. This family of organic compounds is referred to as alcohols, examples of which are
shown in Table 10A–1.
Table 10A–1 Structures of three alcohols
Name Molecular formula Structural formula Semi-structural formula
Methanol CH4O
H
H CH3OH
C
H
O H
Ethanol C2H6O
H
H
H CH3CH2OH
C
H
C
H
O H
Propan-1-ol C3H8O
H
H
H
H
C
C
C
3 2 1
H
H
H
CH3CH2CH2OH
O H
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
10A ANALYSIS OF FUNCTIONAL GROUPS
393
You should also recall here the rules for naming alcohols larger than ethanol and that
the position of the hydroxyl group on the parent hydrocarbon chain must be included in
the name. You should also recall the difference between primary, secondary and tertiary
alcohols from Section 8C. Examples with a description of each are outlined in Table 10A–2.
Table 10A–2 Examples of, and the distinction between, primary, secondary and tertiary alcohols
LINK
8C FUNCTIONAL
GROUPS:
HALOALKANES,
AMINES AND
ALCOHOLS
Alcohol type
Primary Secondary Tertiary
Structural
formula
H
H C
H
H
C
H
H
C
H
OH
H
H C
H
H
C
OH
H
C
H
H
H3C
OH
C CH3
CH3
Name Propan-1-ol Propan-2-ol 2-methylpropan-2-ol
Distinction The carbon atom that
the –OH functional
group is bonded to is
only bonded to one other
carbon atom.
The carbon atom that
the –OH functional
group is bonded to is
bonded to two other
carbon atoms.
The carbon atom that
the –OH functional
group is bonded to is
bonded to three other
carbon atoms.
Esterification
Esterification reactions, which you learned about in Section 9B, can be used to confirm
the presence of primary, secondary and tertiary alcohols – that is, the hydroxyl functional
group. Simply, these reactions are performed by mixing an alcohol with a carboxylic acid to
produce an ester. An example of the procedure is shown in Figure 10A–9.
Ester odour
Alcohol
+
Carboxylic acid
+
Sulfuric acid
Water
LINK
9B ORGANIC
REACTIONS:
CONDENSATION
AND
HYDROLYSIS
Beaker
Gauze mat
Tripod
Bunsen burner
Figure 10A–9 Experimental set-up of an esterification reaction
Concentrated sulfuric acid, the catalyst, is added to the test tube, and the contents of
the test tube are heated. Both the sulfuric acid catalyst and the heat speed up the rate of
reaction to produce the ester. If an ester is produced, it is detected by its odour. An example
reaction is shown below.
sulfuric acid
ethanol + ethanoic acid ethyl ethanoate + water
H2SO4
CH3CH2OH(aq) + CH3COOH(aq) CH3COOCH2CH3(aq) + H2O(l)
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
394 CHAPTER 10 LABORATORY ANALYSIS OF ORGANIC COMPOUNDS
If an organic compound containing a hydroxyl group is not present, then no ester odour is
produced and it is not an esterification reaction. This is summarised in Figure 10A–10.
Reaction produces
an odour
HYDROXYL
GROUP (–OH)
PRESENT
Sample mixed with a
carboxylic acid and
sulfuric acid and heated
Reaction does
not produce
an odour
NO HYDROXYL
GROUP (–OH)
PRESENT
Figure 10A–10 The possible results of the outcome of an esterification test for the
presence of a hydroxyl functional group
Oxidation
If you want to distinguish between primary and secondary alcohols compared to tertiary
alcohols, a redox reaction can be performed. Primary and secondary alcohols can both be
oxidised, however, tertiary alcohols cannot.
An example of a chemical equation for this oxidation reaction is given below.
H
H H
MnO4
–/H+
or
H H
H
C
C
C
2–
Cr2O7 /H+
H
OH C
O
C
C
O H
H
H
H
H
H
Primary alcohol Carboxylic acid
Primary alcohol Carboxylic acid
In this reaction, a small amount of an oxidising agent, such as acidified potassium
dichromate, K2Cr2O7, can be added to the alcohol in a test tube. The contents are mixed
before being placed in a heated water bath for a few minutes. Originally, this solution will be
orange; however, if a primary or secondary alcohol is present, the solution will change colour
from orange to green, as represented in Figure 10A–11.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
10A ANALYSIS OF FUNCTIONAL GROUPS
395
Propan-2-ol
(secondary alcohol)
Propan-1-ol
(primary alcohol)
30.0°C
2-methylpropan-2-ol
(tertiary alcohol)
Figure 10A–11 Oxidation
reaction for primary,
secondary and tertiary
alcohols. If a colour
change occurs, then
either a primary or
secondary alcohol is
present. If no colour
change occurs, a tertiary
alcohol is present.
The potential outcomes of this test are summarised in Figure 10A–12.
Sample changes
colour to green
Alkanol sample mixed
with acidified
dichromate solution
HYDROXYL
GROUP (–OH)
PRESENT
PRIMARY
OR
SECONDARY
ALCOHOL
Sample stays
orange
TERTIARY
ALCOHOL
OR
NO HYDROXYL
GROUP (–OH)
PRESENT
Figure 10A–12 The possible results of an oxidation test for the presence of a
hydroxyl functional group
Check-in questions − Set 1
1 What reacts more readily with a halogen – an alkane or an alkene?
2 If you conducted a bromine test only in the light, would you be able to differentiate
between an alkane and an alkene? Explain why or why not.
3 If you want to test for the presence of a hydroxyl functional group, you can mix the
sample with a carboxylic acid to see if an ester forms. What two other steps must be
performed?
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
396 CHAPTER 10 LABORATORY ANALYSIS OF ORGANIC COMPOUNDS
8D FUNCTIONAL
GROUPS:
ALDEHYDES,
KETONES,
CARBOXYLIC
ACIDS AND
ESTERS
LINK
Qualitative tests for carboxyl functional groups
What are carboxyl functional groups?
Recall from Section 8D that a carboxyl functional group is –COOH bonded to a hydrocarbon
chain. This family of organic compounds is referred to as carboxylic acids, examples of which
are shown in Table 10A–3.
Table 10A–3 Structures of the first three carboxylic acids
Name Common name Structural formula Semi-structural formula
Methanoic acid Formic acid
H
O HCOOH
OC H
Ethanoic acid Acetic acid
H
H
H
O
C
CH3COOH
O H
Propanoic acid Propionic acid
H
H
C
H H
O
C
CH3CH2COOH
O H
9B ORGANIC
REACTIONS:
CONDENSATION
AND
HYDROLYSIS
LINK
Esterification
As you learned in Section 9B and earlier in this chapter, when testing for hydroxyl groups,
esterification reactions can be used to confirm the presence of carboxyl groups as well.
Simply, these reactions are performed by mixing an alcohol with a carboxylic acid to
produce an ester, as was shown in Figure 10A–9 on page 393.
If an ester is produced, it is detected by its ester odour. An example reaction can be found
earlier in this chapter on page 393. If an organic compound containing a carboxyl group is
not present, then no ester odour will be produced and it is not an esterification reaction.
Reaction produces
ester odour
CARBOXYL
GROUP (–COOH)
PRESENT
Sample mixed with an
alcohol and sulfuric
acid and heated
Reaction does
not produce
ester odour
NO CARBOXYL
GROUP (–COOH)
PRESENT
Figure 10A–13 The possible results of an esterification test for the presence of a carboxyl
functional group
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
10A ANALYSIS OF FUNCTIONAL GROUPS
397
Litmus test
You might recall from Unit 2 that litmus is a water-soluble substance extracted from
lichens. Litmus can be used either as a solution or absorbed onto filter paper. Litmus turns
red under acidic conditions and blue under basic conditions.
Blue litmus paper
Red litmus paper
LINK UNIT 2
Acidic solution
Blue litmus turns red Basic solution
Red litmus turns blue
Figure 10A–14 Change in colour of litmus paper
under both acidic (left) and basic (right) conditions
If litmus paper is placed into an aqueous solution of a carboxylic acid, the appearance of a
red colour confirms the presence of a carboxyl functional group, or carboxylic acid.
An example of the dissociation of ethanoic acid when reacted with water is shown below.
ethanoic acid + water acid
→
CH3COOH(aq) + H2O(l)
→
ethanoate acid + hydronium acid
CH3COO–(aq) + H3O+(aq)
Reacting with sodium carbonate
You will recall from Unit 2 that reacting acids with metal carbonates results in the
production of a salt, water and carbon dioxide, as shown in the example equation below.
LINK UNIT 2
Acid + Metal carbonate Salt + Water + Carbon dioxide
C4H6O6(aq) + Na2CO3(s) Confirmation of the presence
of a carboxyl group can be
seen through the bubbling of
the solution, indicating that a
gas is produced. To confirm
that this gas is indeed carbon
dioxide, a delivery tube can
be passed from the reaction
mixture into a solution of
limewater. If the limewater
changes from clear to cloudy,
then carbon dioxide is
produced. This is shown in
Figure 10A–15.
Na2C4H4O6(aq) + H2O(l) + CO2(g)
Delivery tube
Rubber stopper
Ethanoic acid
CO2 gas
Sodium carbonate
Figure 10A–15 In an acid and metal carbonate reaction, the presence
of carbon dioxide is indicated by bubbling the gas produced through
limewater and determining if the limewater turns cloudy.
Limewater solution
turns cloudy
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
398 CHAPTER 10 LABORATORY ANALYSIS OF ORGANIC COMPOUNDS
WORKSHEET
10A–1
ANALYSING
QUALITATIVE
TESTS TO
DETERMINE THE
PRESENCE OF
FUNCTIONAL
GROUPS
DOC
Summarising qualitative tests
So far in this chapter, you’ve learned about a number of different tests checking for the
presence of carbon–carbon double bonds, hydroxyl and carboxyl functional groups.
Table 10A–4 shows a summary of the different tests associated with each functional group,
as well as what result confirms a positive result.
Table 10A–4 Summary of tests for different functional groups
Functional group Chemical test Positive result
Carbon–carbon
double bond (C=C)
Bromine Solution changes from yellow-orange to colourless
Baeyer’s Solution changes from black (or brown) to colourless
Hydroxyl (–OH) Esterification Ester odour
Oxidation Solution changes from orange to green
Carboxyl (–COOH) Esterification Ester odour
Litmus Blue litmus turns red
Metal carbonate Carbon dioxide gas bubbled through limewater
changes it from clear to cloudy.
VIDEO 10A–1
SKILLS:
IDENTIFYING
AN UNKNOWN
SUBSTANCE
10A SKILLS
Identifying an unknown substance
Refer back to the Study Design dot point for Section 10A, shown below:
• qualitative tests for the presence of carbon–carbon double bonds, hydroxyl and
carboxyl functional groups
The authors feel that the intent of this Study Design dot point is for students to use a
flow chart idea to help identify an unknown substance from an alkane, alkene, alcohol or
carboxylic acid.
An example of what a flow chart for this could look like, given the tests presented in this
chapter, is shown below.
Unknown molecule
+ bromine water (in dark) (BROMINE TEST)
No colour change
+ acidified potassium dichromate
(OXIDATION TEST FOR HYDROXYL)
Colour change (yellow-orange to colourless)
ALKENE
Colour change (orange to green)
PRIMARY or SECONDARY ALCOHOL
+ metal carbonate
(METAL CARBONATE TEST
FOR CARBOXYL)
No colour change
+ metal carbonate
(METAL CARBONATE TEST
FOR CARBOXYL)
No gas produced
SECONDARY ALCOHOL
Gas produced
PRIMARY ALCOHOL
No gas produced
TERTIARY ALCOHOL
Gas produced
CARBOXYLIC ACID
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
10A ANALYSIS OF FUNCTIONAL GROUPS
399
Being able to use your knowledge of organic molecules learned in Chapter 8 with your
knowledge of organic reactions learned in Chapter 9, and combining this with your
knowledge of the different tests and results learned in this section will be important in
helping you determine the identity of an unknown organic molecule.
You could use this flow chart as a basis for adding detail, such as:
• colour coding to represent the specific colour change observed in certain tests.
• examples of structural formulas of the resulting organic molecules that are
determined from each pathway.
• examples of chemical equations to show the reactions taking place.
Flow charts such as these are useful ways to condense your understanding into smaller
and more easily memorisable visual pieces of information.
Section 10A questions
1 A sample is known to contain either propane or propene.
a To determine what the compound is, a scientist first performs a bromine test.
When the test is conducted in the dark, the sample remains a yellow-orange colour.
When the test is conducted in the presence of a UV light source, the same result is
obtained. Is it possible to conclude if the sample is propane or propene from these
results? Why or why not?
b Describe another test that the scientist could perform to determine if the sample is
propane or propene.
2 An esterification test can be used to detect the presence of both a carboxyl and a
hydroxyl functional group.
a Explain why it is possible to use this test to detect both functional groups.
b Describe the positive result that is obtained from this test.
c Is this result qualitative or quantitative? Why?
3 For each of the following types of data, state whether they are quantitative or qualitative.
a red litmus paper turning blue
b a sample changing colour from orange to green
c a sample giving a pH reading of 3.0
d the absorbance of a solution increasing as the colour of the sample gets darker
e observing the production of bubbles during a chemical reaction
4 You receive two samples from a laboratory. You know that one contains a primary
alcohol and the other contains a tertiary alcohol. However, the labelling got smudged in
transport and you can no longer read it.
a Use a flow chart to demonstrate the steps you would undertake to determine which
sample is the primary alcohol and which is the tertiary alcohol.
b Describe another test, not included in your flow chart from part a, that could be
performed to help you better distinguish between the two unknown samples.
5 A 2.76 g sample of an unknown hydrocarbon (M = 138 g mol–1) reacts completely
with 15.23 g of iodine (I2). How many carbon–carbon double bonds are present in
the hydrocarbon?
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
400 CHAPTER 10 LABORATORY ANALYSIS OF ORGANIC COMPOUNDS
10B
•
Analysis of purity and concentration
Study Design:
Applications and principles of laboratory analysis
techniques in verifying components and purity
of consumer products, including melting point
determination and distillation (simple and fractional)
Volumetric analysis, including calculations of excess and
limiting reactants using redox titrations (excluding back
titrations)
Glossary:
Analyte
Concordant
End point
Equivalence point
Melting point
Purity
Standard solution
Titrant
•
ENGAGE
Organic versus inorganic disinfectants
Nature’s oldest organic disinfectant, known as hypochlorous acid (HOCl), is actually
produced by white blood cells in the human body. This means it is used to fight off
pathogenic infections. This is the primary reason why hypochlorous acid is present
in many hand sanitisers, as it targets bacterial pathogens on the skin without causing
any irritation. Advantages for medical institutes and businesses of using this organic
disinfectant, not to mention the human body, is that it is not harmful to humans
(or animals and plants), releases non-harmful chemicals, fumes or residues and is
biodegradable. Other examples of organic disinfectants include vinegar (acetic acid) and
hydrogen peroxide.
Organic disinfectants are preferred over inorganic disinfectants, like chloramines used
to chlorinate drinking water, for the same anti-pathogenic purpose. If high amounts of
chloramines are ingested it can lead to stomach aches, vomiting and diarrhoea, or even
death. It can also cause pipe corrosion, which subsequently allows metals such as iron,
copper and lead to be present in our drinking water.
Redox titrations are very useful
in helping to quantitively
determine the level of
substances in water supplies,
while maintaining the levels of
these substance within desired
concentrations. In this section,
you will learn about laboratory
techniques that are used to test
the purity and composition of
consumer products. Volumetric
analysis using redox titrations,
such as the one described to
test water purity, is one such
technique that will be covered
along with melting point
determination and distillation.
Figure 10B–1 Collecting a water sample to analyse the
water purity
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
10B ANALYSIS OF PURITY AND CONCENTRATION
401
EXPLAIN
As well as qualitative tests to identity the presence of different functional groups to assess
the success of a chemical reaction, quantitative tests to determine the purity of a product
are also critically important. Depending on the type of consumer product in question,
impurities can have a range of unwanted effects, from health issues to inaccurate research
results. While the following tests can also give an indication about the identity of the
components within a sample, we will look at this aspect more closely when we discuss
instrumental techniques in Chapter 11.
Analysing purity
To analyse purity, common laboratory techniques take advantage of a couple of properties
of samples. If the sample in question is a solid, we can use the melting point of the
substance to determine whether it is pure. If the sample in question is a liquid, we can use
the boiling point of that substance to determine whether it is pure. While the properties
measured are slightly different in these situations, the basis for how they assess purity is the
same. In these experiments, there are two main outcomes:
• The sample has a fixed, sharp value for the boiling or melting point. This indicates that
the sample is pure.
• The sample has a melting or boiling point that occurs across a range, rather than a single
discrete value. This indicates that the sample is impure.
Let’s now look specifically at three different techniques that apply these principles to
determine the purity of products.
Melting point determination
Melting point determination is a common laboratory technique from which the purity of a
solid can be established. The melting point is defined as the temperature range from which a
solid first starts to transition to a liquid state until this process has finished (that is, all of the
solid has become liquid or completely melted).
For a pure solid, the melting point is contained
within a very narrow (or sharp) range. Usually,
this will be within 1–2°C. The melting point of
a pure substance is also characteristic for that
compound. This means that the melting point
can be used to give an indication of the identity
of the compound in a sample. For example, pure
citric acid, an acidity regulator used in cooking,
has a melting point of 153°C. If we had a sample
of unknown colourless, translucent crystalline
material, performed a melting point analysis of it
and found that the melting point was 153°C, this
would suggest that the sample may be citric acid.
When a solid contains impurities, the melting
point is altered in two ways. Firstly, it begins
to melt at a lower temperature. Secondly, it
melts across a larger range of temperatures. To
understand this, we need to picture what a pure
and an impure solid would look like at a molecular
level (Figure 10B–2).
Purity
the degree
to which a
substance or
compound
is free from
contaminants or
other unwanted
materials
LINK 11A MASS
SPECTROMETRY
Melting point
the temperature
range from which
a solid first starts
to transition to a
liquid state until
this process has
finished (i.e. all
of the solid has
become liquid
or completely
melted)
Figure 10B–2 The crystals in a pure substance are arranged
in a more ordered fashion (top) compared to when there is an
impurity present (bottom).
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
402 CHAPTER 10 LABORATORY ANALYSIS OF ORGANIC COMPOUNDS
It can be seen that in a pure substance, the crystals can be arranged in an ordered fashion.
This means that they are able to pack more closely together, which allows for stronger
intermolecular forces. However, this is not the case when there is a contaminant or
impurity present in the substance (that is, the substance is impure). In these cases, the
impurity disrupts the ordered structure and causes the crystals to have a greater level
of disorder, weakening the intermolecular forces between them. For this reason, a
pure substance will have a higher melting point than the same substance that contains
impurities.
A good example of this can be seen by looking at the melting point of pure ice compared to
ice formed in the ocean (ice containing salt and other impurities). As you would probably
know, the melting point of pure ice is 0°C at 101.3 kPa. However, the melting point of ice
formed in sea water is lower than this; it would start melting at around –2°C at 101.3 kPa.
So how is this measured in a laboratory to test the purity of consumer products? The
technique involves the use of a melting point apparatus, as shown in Figure 10B–3.
Figure 10B–3 A melting point apparatus can be used to measure the melting point of a sample so
that its purity can be analysed.
While there are a number of variations of this machine, they all function with the same
basic characteristics.
• They have a port where a sample can be inserted, usually inside a thin tube (known as a
capillary tube).
• They have a way of raising the temperature applied to the sample until it melts.
• They have a way of observing a magnified image of the sample, so it can be monitored
for when it begins to melt and when it has melted completely.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
10B ANALYSIS OF PURITY AND CONCENTRATION
403
The process that is observed is represented in Figure 10B–4.
1 2 3 4
Below melting
temperature
Melting range
Figure 10B–4 The steps that a solid sample goes
through during melting point determination allow
the melting range and purity to be determined.
As a reminder, the higher the purity of a sample, the smaller the temperature range for
the sample to go from beginning to melt to completely melted (tubes 2–4). However, if
a sample has lower purity, it will begin to melt (tube 2) at a lower temperature and the
temperature range between the initial and final melting point (tubes 2–4) will
be greater.
Melting point determination allows us to assess the purity and components of a solid
sample. However, what if our sample is a liquid? For this, we use a technique known
as distillation. Depending on the nature of the liquid sample, we can either use simple
distillation or fractional distillation.
Simple distillation
Simple distillation is a method used to both separate and purify liquids. It is based on the
fact that different liquids have different boiling points. The process of simple distillation is
often used in a laboratory setting to separate and purify different chemicals, or to separate
a mixture of liquids into its individual components.
However, there is also a long history of using distillation techniques in Australia outside
of the laboratory. Prior to colonisation, many First Nations peoples utilised steam
distillation: by placing wet plant matter over a controlled fire, a person could be placed
over the fire in the manner of a ‘steam bath’ and be exposed to the medicinal vapours.
Eucalyptus dives (the broad-leaved peppermint from New South Wales and Victoria) was
used in such a manner for the treatment of fevers. These benefits of eucalyptus oils were
soon noticed by early colonists, and in late 1788, colonists began distilling Eucalyptus
piperita for medicinal purposes. You will look at the medicinal aspects of chemistry in
further detail in Section 12A.
In the laboratory setting, the process of simple distillation involves heating a mixture of
liquids in a flask and collecting the vapour that is produced. The vapour is then cooled and
condensed back into a liquid form, which is collected in a separate container. The liquid
that is collected is called the distillate. This is illustrated in Figure 10B–5.
LINK
12A ORGANIC
COMPOUNDS AS
MEDICINES
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
404 CHAPTER 10 LABORATORY ANALYSIS OF ORGANIC COMPOUNDS
Thermometer
Cooling
water out
Cooling
water in
Condenser
Round bottom flask
Distillate
Hotplate
VIDEO 10B–1
SIMPLE
DISTILLATION
OF ETHANOL
AND WATER
Figure 10B–5 The general setup of a simple distillation experiment
To understand how this can be used to verify the components and purity of a compound
in a consumer product, let’s focus on an example: propyl ethanoate (C5H10O2), which is an
ester found in plant extracts and has the flavour and odour of pear. It is miscible in alcohols,
such as ethanol.
Propyl ethanoate has a boiling point of 102°C. Ethanol, on the other hand, has a boiling point
of 78.5°C at 101.3 kPa. As the boiling points of these two liquids are quite different, simple
distillation can be used for the analysis of mixtures containing these two components. If
our plant contained nothing other than propyl ethanoate and ethanol, we would expect our
experiment to proceed as follows.
The process of simple distillation starts by heating the mixture of propyl ethanoate and
ethanol. As the temperature increases to 78.5°C, the ethanol will begin to boil. The gas will
then travel up the cylinder and through the condenser, where it will cool down and turn
back into a liquid state. This liquid is then collected in a separate container as the distillate.
The first distillate, containing pure ethanol, could then be removed and a clean round
bottom flask attached to the end of the condenser. The experiment could then be allowed
to continue with the mixture being heated until it reaches 102°C at 101.3 kPa, at which
point we would see the remaining liquid turn into vapour. This would again travel up the
tube and into the condenser, where it would cool down and turn back into liquid propyl
ethanoate to be collected as a second distillate. In this way, we could finish the experiment
with one flask containing pure ethanol and one flask containing pure propyl ethanoate.
If these results were obtained, this would allow us to have a high level of confidence that
the plant extract that we purchased does indeed contain a mixture of propyl ethanoate
and ethanol.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
10B ANALYSIS OF PURITY AND CONCENTRATION
405
While these are the ideal results for separating a mixture that contains only these components,
let’s now look at some other findings that could be obtained in this simple distillation and
discuss what they would mean for the analysis of our plant extract (Table 10B–1).
Table 10B–1 Analysis of results from the simple distillation of a plant extract that is thought to
contain only ethanol and propyl ethanoate
Observation Analysis
A distillate is collected at a temperature lower
than the boiling point of ethanol.
The mixture contains a component other
than ethanol and propyl ethanoate. This may
suggest that impurities are present.
No distillate is collected around the boiling
point of ethanol.
It is likely that the mixture does not contain
any ethanol. This suggests that the plant
extract has not been prepared correctly.
A distillate is collected at a temperature
greater than the boiling point of propyl
ethanoate.
The mixture contains a component other
than ethanol and propyl ethanoate. This may
suggest that impurities are present.
This example highlights the fact that simple distillation can be used to provide some
indication about both the purity of a consumer product and the identity of the components
within it. Simple distillation is a relatively simple and inexpensive process, but it is not
always effective for separating liquids with similar boiling points. In such cases, a technique
called fractional distillation may be used. Fractional distillation is similar to simple
distillation, but it involves a more complex set-up that allows for a more accurate separation
of liquids with similar boiling points.
Fractional distillation
As briefly discussed in Section 1A, fractional distillation is a method used to separate
different components in a mixture. It is based on the principle that different components in
a mixture have different boiling points.
During fractional distillation, a mixture is heated until it vapourises and the vapour then
passes through a fractionating column. The column is filled with packing materials, such
as glass beads or metal mesh, that help to slow down the vapour. There is a temperature
gradient across the fractionating column – the highest temperature occurs at the bottom
(as it is closest to the heat source) and the lowest temperature occurs at the top of the
column. This gradient allows for different vapour components to condense at different
temperatures. If they condense before reaching the top of the fractionating column, they
will run back down the column towards the round bottom flask.
From this point, the process proceeds in a similar fashion to simple distillation. The first
distillate that is collected will contain the component of the mixture that has the lowest
boiling point, as this will remain as a vapour until it reaches the top of the fractionating
column and then passes into the condenser, where it cools further until it condenses back
to a liquid and is captured in the conical flask. This flask is then removed and replaced
with a fresh flask. As the mixture continues to be heated, the component with the second
lowest boiling point will reach the top of the fractionating column and go through the
same process. This continues to be repeated until all of the different distillates, or fractions,
are collected.
LINK 1A TYPES OF
FUELS
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
406 CHAPTER 10 LABORATORY ANALYSIS OF ORGANIC COMPOUNDS
Each fraction contains a different component of the mixture, depending on its boiling
point. This experimental setup is illustrated in Figure 10B–6.
Thermometer
Fractionating column
Water out
Condenser
Round bottom flask
Water in
Bunsen burner
Figure 10B–6 The setup of a fractional distillation experiment
Fractional distillation is commonly used in the chemical and oil industries to identify
the components of a substance (not purity, as these fractions contain a mixture of
hydrocarbons). For example, it can be used to separate crude oil into different fractions,
such as petrol, diesel and jet fuel. An example of how crude oil is separated by fractional
distillation at an industrial level is shown in Figure 10B–7. It can be seen that each distillate
is collected simultaneously by having condensers branching off from each level of the
fractionating column. This helps make the process more efficient.
Liquid petroleum gas
< 25°C
25–60°C
Petrol (gasoline)
Naphtha
60–180°C
Paraffin
180–220°C
Diesel
220–250°C
Fuel oil
250–300°C
Lubricating oil
300–350°C
> 350°C
Bitumen
Figure 10B–7 The process for fractional distillation of crude oil at an industrial level
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
10B ANALYSIS OF PURITY AND CONCENTRATION
407
Fractional distillation can also be used in the laboratory setting to separate and purify
different chemicals. By analysing the fractions collected during fractional distillation,
scientists can determine the composition and purity of the original mixture, in a similar
way to the procedure described for simple distillation. As an example, under reduced
pressure, fractional distillation is used to isolate essential oils like citronella or limonene.
Distillation can be used to extract and purify the natural organic compounds in plants, such
as extracting limonene from orange peel, which typically makes up more than 95% of the
peel. Limonene (C10H16) is also an unsaturated hydrocarbon, which means that it can be
put through a bromine water test, as outlined in Section 10A.
Volumetric analysis
Volumetric analysis allows for the accurate determination of an unknown concentration
for a solution. The concept of volumetric analysis was discussed in Unit 2 through the
application of acid–base titrations. However, in Unit 4, we will be focusing purely on redox
titrations. As with other types of volumetric analysis, redox titrations are a type of chemical
analysis used to determine the concentration of a substance in a solution. However, in this
instance, they are based on the principle of oxidation–reduction reactions, where electrons
are transferred from one molecule to another. In a redox titration, a solution of known
concentration, called the titrant, is slowly added to a solution of unknown concentration,
called the analyte, until the reaction between the two is complete.
Redox titration is a precise and reliable method for
measuring the concentration of a wide variety of
chemicals, making it an important tool for many different
fields.
Burette
In the food industry, redox titration is used to determine
the purity or concentration of a compound. For example, it
can be used to measure the concentration of ascorbic acid
(vitamin C) in a vitamin C tablet or in different brands of
orange juice, by titrating with an iodine solution. Redox
titration is a powerful tool that can be used in a wide
range of applications. In addition to the food industry, it
is also commonly used in the pharmaceutical and water
industries, as well as in environmental monitoring.
A redox titration is performed similarly to other forms
of volumetric analysis. The required equipment and its
arrangement is illustrated in Figure 10B–8.
Preparation of standard solutions
A critical part of any titration experiment is the preparation of the standard solution. To
accurately calculate the concentration of the unknown oxidising agent or reducing agent,
the standard solution needs to be made up correctly. For a compound to be considered
suitable to be used as a primary standard, it needs to fulfil the following criteria:
• have a high molar mass to allow for accurate weight measurement on a balance with
minimal error
• have a high stability/low level of reactivity
• be available with a high level of purity
• inexpensive
• be soluble in water or other common solvents.
LINK
10A ANALYSIS
OF FUNCTIONAL
GROUPS
LINK UNIT 2
Titrant
a solution
of known
concentration
that is added in
titration
Analyte
a solution
of unknown
concentration in
titration that is
the subject of
analysis
Retort stand
Conical flask
Figure 10B–8 The experimental set-up for a
redox titration
Standard
solution
a solution that
contains a
precisely known
concentration;
often used
in volumetric
analysis
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
408 CHAPTER 10 LABORATORY ANALYSIS OF ORGANIC COMPOUNDS
To prepare a primary standard for a titration, an accurate and precise mass of the compound
needs to be weighed out on an electronic balance and made up to an accurate volume in a
volumetric flask. Primary standards can be used to standardise other solutions. These other
solutions are often referred to as secondary standards and can also be used in titrations.
Common primary standards for redox titrations include potassium dichromate (K2Cr2O7)
and potassium iodate (KIO3).
VIDEO
WORKED
EXAMPLE 10B–1
Worked example 10B–1: Calculating an accurate mass to use for preparing a
primary standard
You require 100.0 mL of a 0.250 mol L–1 solution of potassium dichromate (K2Cr2O7)
to use as a primary standard. Calculate the mass of potassium dichromate that must be
weighed out.
Solution
Logic Process
Step 1 Use n = c × V to calculate the
amount, in mol, of potassium
dichromate required.
n(K2Cr2O7) = c × V
= 0.1000 L × 0.250 mol L–1
= 0.250 mol
Step 2 Use the periodic table to calculate the
molar mass of potassium dichromate.
M(K2Cr2O7) = 294.2 g mol–1
Step 3 Use m = n × M to calculate the mass
of potassium dichromate required.
m(K2Cr2O7) = n × M
= 0.250 mol × 294.2 g mol–1
= 7.36 g
Performing a titration
As mentioned previously, the purpose of performing a redox titration is to determine the
unknown concentration of an oxidising agent or a reducing agent. To do this, that solution
undergoes a redox reaction with a solution of known concentration, the titrant. Let’s go
through the steps involved in conducting this experiment.
For this scenario, we are going to have a reducing agent with an unknown concentration in
the conical flask and an oxidising agent as our primary standard in the burette. It is important
to note that you could perform this experiment with the solutions in either location.
The main steps in performing a titration are shown in Figure 10B–9. Each of these steps is
explained in detail.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
Step 1 Step 1 Step 1 10B ANALYSIS OF PURITY AND CONCENTRATION
409
Step 1 Step 2 Step 3 Step 4 Step 5 Step 6
Step 1 Step 2 Step 3 Step 4 Step 5 Step 6
Step 1 Step 2 Step 3 Step 4 Step 5 Step 6
Step 1 Step 2 Step 3 Step 4 Step 5 Step 6
Step 2 Step 3 Step 4 Step 2 Step 3 Step 4 Step 2 Step 3 Step 5 Step 4 Step 5 Step 6
Step 5 Step 6
Step 6
Burette
Burette
Burette
Burette
The reducing
agent, with
unknown
concentration,
is added to the
conical flask using
a pipette.
Burette
Burette
Oxidising
Oxidising
Oxidising
Oxidising
Oxidising
Oxidising
agent
agent
agent
agent
agent
agent
Pipette
Pipette
Pipette
Pipette
Pipette
Pipette
Reducing
Reducing
Reducing
Reducing
Reducing
Reducing
agent
agent
agent
agent
agent
agent
Dropper
Dropper
on off +
on off +
on off +
on off +
% =
% =
% =
–
% =
% =
–
–
–
on on off +
off +
% =
–
–
Final
Final
Final
Final
Dropper
Dropper
Dropper
Final
Final
C 7 8 9 ÷
Dropper
reading
reading
reading
C 7 8 9 ÷
C 7 8 9 ÷
C 7 8 9 ÷
reading
C 7 8 C 7 9 ÷
8 9 ÷
stop stop stop stop reading
reading
flow flow flow flow stop
stop
stop
stop
stop stop flow flow stop
stop
R 4 5 6 ×
Indicator
Indicator
R 4 5 6 ×
R 4 5 6 ×
R 4 5 6 ×
Indicator
Indicator
R 4 5 R 4 6 ×
5 6 ×
Indicator
Indicator
M 1 2 3 –
M 1 2 3 –
M 1 2 3 –
M 1 2 3 –
M 1 2 M 1 3 –
2 3 –
S • on → +
S • on → +
S • on → +
S • on → +
S • on S • on → +
→ +
Once the
indicator (or
oxidising agent/
reducing agent)
changes colour,
the tap is moved
back to the stop
position. The
final volume
reading on
the burette is
recorded. The
total volume
added to the
conical flask is
recorded. Process
is repeated until
three concordant
results are
obtained.
The total volume
of solution
required for
the redox
reaction to go
to completion is
used to calculate
the unknown
concentration.
An indicator is
added to the
solution. It is
important to note
that depending on
the redox reaction
being performed,
an indicator may
not be required.
Some redox
reactions involve
a colour change
that can be
monitored without
the need for an
indicator.
The oxidising
agent, with known
concentration,
is added to the
burette. The initial
volume reading is
recorded.
The tap of
the burette
is turned
to the flow
position
and the
oxidising
agent is
added in a
dropwise
fashion into
the conical
flask.
Figure 10B–9 The main steps in performing a redox titration
In step 5, the importance of obtaining concordant results was described. In the following
table, five example titre volumes have been recorded for an experiment. You can see that
volumes 2, 3 and 4 are concordant, and so, only the average of these three values should be
used for performing any subsequent calculations.
Table 10B–2 Determining concordant titration results
Concordant
in titration, the
volume of two
or more titres
that are within
0.10 mL of each
other
Titre volumes (mL)
1 2 3 4 5
24.10 24.65 24.60 24.70 24.85
NOTE
For accurate redox titrations, the rinsing of each piece of glassware with the correct solutions is
important.
An easy way to remember this is that instruments with the term 'flask' in them, such as conical
flask and volumetric flask, are rinsed with de-ionised water.
The other instruments, such as the pipette and burette, are rinsed with the solutions that go into
them prior to using them to deliver specific volumes as outlined in the steps above.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
410 CHAPTER 10 LABORATORY ANALYSIS OF ORGANIC COMPOUNDS
UNIT 2
LINK
Equivalence
point
the point in a
titration when
the amount,
in moles, of
reactants is
present in the
stoichiometric
ratio that
achieves
neutralisation
End point
the point in
titration when
the indicator
changes colour
Indicators
A titration reaction is performed until the amount, in moles, of reducing agent and
oxidising agent are in the correct stoichiometric ratio for the redox reaction to have gone
to completion. This is known as the equivalence point. However, it is not always something
that can be visualised when performing the experiment. Therefore, we use a way to observe
this occurring. When acid–base titrations were studied in Unit 2, the concept of indicators
was discussed. Acid–base indicators change colour in response to changes in the pH of the
solution, and the time at which the indicator changes colour is known as the end point. It is
important to realise that the equivalence point and the end point are not identical.
The concept is exactly the same in redox titrations, however, it is often not necessary for an
additional indicator to be added. This is because some of the compounds used as primary
or secondary standards in redox titrations will undergo a colour change of their own when
the reaction occurs. Two common processes that are utilised during redox titrations, and
their associated colour changes, are listed below.
• Potassium
permanganate is a
strong oxidising agent
that is commonly used
as a standard solution
in redox titrations. As
it is reduced, it goes
through a number of
colour changes (Figure
10B–10). This property
allows for the end
Permanganate ions
(MnO4 )–
Manganate ions
(MnO4 ) 2–
Manganese dioxide
(MnO2)
point to be visualised
without the addition of
Figure 10B–10 Potassium permanganate undergoes a number of
colour changes as it is reduced during a redox titration.
an indicator.
• Iodine is another common oxidising agent that can be used in redox titrations. When
iodine is used as the titrant, it is common to utilise starch as an indicator. Unlike in the
example above, starch isn’t participating in the redox titration. However, during the
redox titration, iodine is being reduced to iodide ions (I–). These iodide ions are able
to participate in a separate reaction with the starch, which forms a characteristic dark
blue-purple colour. A colour change in the analyte from colourless to purple is used to
visualise the end point in these titrations.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
10B ANALYSIS OF PURITY AND CONCENTRATION
411
Titration calculations
The process to calculate the unknown concentration of a solution in any redox titration
uses the same series of steps as those used in an acid–base titration. These steps are
illustrated in the flow chart in Figure 10B–11.
Use half
equations
to determine
the overall
balanced
redox
equation
Write a full
balanced
equation
for the
redox
reaction.
Calculate the
amount, in mol, of
standard added using
n = cV
(c = concentration
of standard
V = volume of
standard added to
reach end point)
Calculate the
Calculate the
amount,
amount,
in mol, in the
in mol, in the
unknown
unknown
solution by
solution by
applying
applying
molar ratios
molar ratios
Figure 10B–11 Calculating the unknown concentration of any solution in a redox titration
Calculate the
Calculate the
concentration of
concentration of
the unknown
the unknown
solution using
solution using
n = cV
n = cV
(n = amount,
(n = amount,
in mol, in the
in mol, in the
unknown solution,
unknown solution,
V = volume of the
V = volume of the
unknown solution)
unknown solution)
Worked example 10B–2: Redox titration calculations
VIDEO
WORKED
EXAMPLE 10B–2
A student performed a redox titration to determine the concentration of a solution of
iron(II) ions (Fe2+) using acidified potassium permanganate (KMnO4) as the oxidising
agent. The student used 25.00 mL of 0.100 M KMnO4 to titrate a 50.00 mL sample of the
Fe2+ solution. The half-equations occurring are:
Fe2+(aq) → Fe3+(aq) + e–
→ Mn2+(aq) + 4H2O(l)
MnO4
–(aq) + 8H+(aq) + 5e–
Determine the concentration of the Fe2+ solution.
Solution
DOC
WORKSHEET
10B–1
CALCULATIONS
FOR REDOX
TITRATIONS
Logic Process
Step 1 Write a balanced equation for the overall
redox reaction.
MnO4
–(aq) + 5Fe2+(aq) + 8H+(aq)
→ Mn2+(aq) + 5Fe3+(aq) + 4H2O(l)
Step 2 Extract the relevant information from the
question.
V(MnO4
–) = 0.0250 L
c(MnO4
–) = 0.100 M
V(Fe2+) = 0.0500 L
Step 3 Calculate the amount, in mol, of potassium
permanganate using n = cV.
n(MnO4
–) = c × V
= 0.100 M × 0.0250 L
= 0.00250 mol
Step 4 Calculate the amount, in mol, of iron(II)
ions using molar ratios.
n(Fe2+) = n(MnO4
–) × 5
= 0.00250 mol × 5
= 0.0125 mol
Step 5 Calculate the concentration of iron(II) ions
using n = cV.
c(Fe2+) = n
V
0.0125 mol
=
0.0500 L
= 0.250 M
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
412 CHAPTER 10 LABORATORY ANALYSIS OF ORGANIC COMPOUNDS
10B SKILLS
Calculation process for redox titrations
In this section, you learned about performing calculations in a volumetric analysis
for redox titrations. As you saw with these calculations, the unknown concentration
of one reactant needs to be determined from information known about the other
VIDEO 10B–2
SKILLS:
CALCULATION
PROCESS FOR
REDOX TITRATIONS
reactant. As such, questions for volumetric analysis include many numerical values.
It is therefore important when writing symbols for given equations to assign more information to the
chemical species to which the value refers. Here, this is termed ‘notations’. It is also important to follow key
steps in a process where the reactants and numerical values change in a problem but the key steps of the
process do not. These steps are outlined using the example question below.
Question:
Aliquots of 20.00 mL of a brand of orange juice with an unknown concentration of ascorbic acid (C6H8O6)
are reacted with a 0.00500 M iodine solution, placed in the burette. A starch indicator is added to the
conical flask with the orange juice. During this reaction the iodine will react (be reduced) with the ascorbic
acid to form iodide. When the ascorbic acid has been used up, the remaining iodine will react with the
starch indicator and change from a blue-black colour to a very pale blue-grey colour. This is the end
point of the titration. The mean titre volume delivered is 30.45 mL. The reaction occurs according to the
following equation:
C6H8O6(aq) + I2(aq) → 2I–(aq) + 2H+(aq) + C6H6O6(aq).
Determine the concentration of the ascorbic acid in the orange juice.
Solution:
Logic Process
Step 1 Write the respective half-equations for
the reduction and oxidation reactions.
Oxidation half-equation:
C6H8O6(aq) → 2H+(aq) + C6H6O6(aq) + 2e–
Reduction half-equation:
I2(aq) + 2e–
→ 2I–(aq)
Step 2 Write a balanced redox equation by
combining the two half-equations from
Step 1.
C6H8O6(aq) + I2(aq) → 2I–(aq) + 2H+(aq) + C6H6O6(aq)
Step 3 Use the information in the stem of the
question to write down what is known
and unknown.
Clearly include notation about which
species each value refers to, as opposed
to just c or V.
c(C6H8O6) = ?
V(C6H8O6) = 20.00 mL = 0.02000 L
c(I2) = 0.00500 mol L–1
V(I2) = 30.45 mL = 0.03045 L
Step 4 Determine the amount, in mol, of iodine.
Again, use specific notation, n(I2), as
opposed to just n.
*Remember to keep the full number
in the calculator for this step in the
calculations.
n(I2) = c(I2) × V(I2)
= 0.00500 mol L–1 × 0.03045 L
= 1.52 × 10–4 mol
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
10B ANALYSIS OF PURITY AND CONCENTRATION
413
Logic Process
Step 5 Use the mole ratio in the balanced
equation from Step 2 to determine the
amount, in mol, of ascorbic acid.
Again, use specific notation, n(C6H8O6),
as opposed to just ‘n’.
*Remember to keep the full number in
the calculator again for this step in the
calculations.
n(C6H8O6) = n(I2)
= 1.52 × 10–4 mol
Step 6 Calculate the unknown concentration of
ascorbic acid, using correct notation. n(C6H8O6)
c(C6H8O6) =
=
V(C6H8O6)
1.52 × 10–4 mol
0.02000 L
= 0.00761 mol L–1
Remember, in these types of questions, obviously you are attempting to calculate the unknown
concentration of a reactant, but it is equally important for your teacher or examiner to follow each step in
your process of working. If by chance you were to enter a number incorrectly into your scientific calculator,
at least the person assessing your work will be able to identify whether you have followed the correct
process and written down the correct values for each step in this process.
Section 10B questions
1 Melting point determination can be used to determine the purity and identity of a consumer product.
a What is the melting point of a substance?
b Compare the results that you would expect to observe in a melting point determination experiment for
a pure substance and an impure sample of the same substance.
c How can melting point determination be used to give an indication of the identity of the sample?
2 Simple distillation is a process that can be used to purify and check the purity of consumer products.
a What property of a substance is exploited in simple distillation?
b An 80% v/v solution of ethanol in water in a conical flask is processed through simple distillation. The
first distillate is collected at 80°C, just above the boiling point of ethanol. Will this distillate have a
higher or lower concentration of ethanol than the starting solution?
c What might be one explanation for why the observed result would be different to the expected result for
part b?
3 In a redox titration, 25.00 mL of an unknown solution of MnO4
– was titrated with a solution of Fe2+ with a
concentration of 0.0100 M. The balanced half-equations for the reaction are:
MnO4
– + 8H+ + 5e–
Fe2+ → Fe3+ + e–
→ Mn2+ + 4H2O
The end point was reached after the addition of 20.00 mL of the Fe2+ solution.
a What is the balanced equation for the overall titration reaction?
b What is the amount, in moles, of Fe2+ added?
c What is the amount, in moles, of MnO4
– in the unknown solution?
d What is the concentration of the unknown MnO4
– solution?
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
414
Chapter 10 review
Summary
Create your own set of summary notes for this chapter, on paper or in a digital document. A model
summary is provided in the Teacher Resources and can be used to compare with yours.
Checklist
In the Interactive Textbook, the success criteria are linked from the review questions and will be
automatically ticked when answers are correct. Alternatively, print or photocopy this page and tick
the boxes when you have answered the corresponding questions correctly.
Success criteria – I am now able to: Linked questions
10A.1 Explain how qualitative tests can be used to determine the presence
3☐, 13☐
of carbon–carbon double bonds
10A.2 Explain how qualitative tests can be used to determine the presence
9☐, 13☐
of hydroxyl functional groups
10A.3 Explain how qualitative tests can be used to determine the presence
13☐
of carboxyl functional groups
10A.4 Design experimental methods to test for carbon–carbon double
13☐
bonds, and hydroxyl and/or carboxyl functional groups
10A.5 Determine the presence of carbon–carbon double bonds, and
7☐
hydroxyl and/or carboxyl functional groups through analysing
experimental data
10A.6 Describe how a redox titration with iodine can be used to determine
4☐
the number of carbon–carbon double bonds in a molecule
10A.7 Calculate the number of carbon–carbon double bonds in an
13☐
unsaturated hydrocarbon
10B.1 Define ‘purity’ 1☐
10B.2 Describe how the melting point of a consumer product can help
12☐
determine the identity and purity of a consumer product
10B.3 Compare simple and fractional distillation 10B.4 Draw a diagram of the experimental set-up for simple and fractional
6☐, 12☐
12☐
distillation
10B.5 Explain how simple distillation can be used to verify the
10☐
components and purity of a consumer product
10B.6 Explain how fractional distillation can be used to verify the
12☐
components and purity of a consumer product
10B.7 Define ‘end point’ and ‘equivalence point’ 10B.8 Describe the use of an indicator in a redox titration 10B.9 Define ‘standard solution’ 11☐
10B.10 State the key characteristics of a primary standard solution 10B.11 List the steps involved in a redox titration, including glassware involved 10B.12 Calculate the concentration of an unknown solution from given
2☐
5☐
8☐
11☐
11☐
experimental data
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
415
Multiple-choice questions
1 The degree to which a substance is free from contaminants or unwanted materials is known
as its
A purity.
B composition.
C boiling point.
D melting point.
2 The instant at which a permanent colour change is observed in a redox titration is called the
A indicator.
B end point.
C concordant result.
D equivalence point.
3 Qualitative tests to determine the presence of a carbon–carbon double bond involve
A measuring the boiling point of the hydrocarbon.
B measuring the melting point of the hydrocarbon.
C observing the colour change associated with an addition reaction.
D separating the components of the hydrocarbon through fractional distillation.
4 Which of the following is a correctly balanced equation for the reaction between iodine and a
hydrocarbon containing one carbon–carbon double bond?
A C6H14 + I2 → C6H12I2
B C6H14 + I2 → C6H12I2 + H2I2
C C6H12 + I2 → C6H12I2 + H2
D C6H12 + I2 → C6H12I2
5 What is the main reason why an indicator isn’t always used in a redox titration?
A They are expensive and not readily available.
B They only work for acid–base titrations.
C They don’t accurately measure the end point in redox reactions.
D They aren’t necessary if a permanent colour change is observed directly in the redox
reaction.
6 Which of the following is an advantage of fractional distillation over simple distillation?
A It can produce more than one distillate.
B It can separate components that have similar boiling points.
C It can be done more cost effectively and with less equipment.
D It can be performed at much lower temperatures and so is more environmentally friendly.
7 If a carboxyl functional group was present in a hydrocarbon, it would
A turn red litmus paper blue.
B change colour when reacted with bromine.
C have an ester odour after reacting with an alcohol.
D have a melting point lower than expected for its pure compound.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
416
8 Which of the following is not a key characteristic of a primary standard solution used in a
redox titration?
A It reacts readily with the air.
B It is soluble in water and other common solvents.
C It has a high molar mass to allow for accurate weighing.
D It is inexpensive, non-toxic and readily available for purchasing.
9 The colour change that occurs when a primary alcohol is reacted with potassium dichromate is
A green to orange.
B orange to green.
C green to colourless.
D orange to colourless.
10 A sample, which could be pure or a mixture of substances, is distilled. Which row of the table
correctly matches an observation with a valid conclusion about the purity of the sample?
Observed result Conclusion about purity
A A single distillate is obtained at the expected
boiling point.
The sample contains impurities.
B Two distillates are obtained. The sample is pure.
C A single distillate is obtained at the expected
boiling point.
Only one of the expected components is
present in the sample.
D Two distillates are obtained. Both of the expected components are present
in the sample.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
417
Short-answer questions
11 Oxalic acid (C2H2O4) can be used in pottery to create light-coloured ceramics. The working
concentration range for oxalic acid for this purpose is between 0.05 mol L–1 and 0.15 mol L–1
.
A new product has gone on the market for this purpose, called PotOx, but customers have
claimed that the results they are obtaining aren’t suitable. There is a suggestion that this is
because the oxalic acid in the product is at a higher concentration than the recommended
value. Your lab has been asked to test this hypothesis by performing a redox titration.
a Potassium dichromate (K2Cr2O7) is to be used as the standard solution for this titration.
Define the term ‘standard solution’. (1 mark)
b You are required to prepare 100.0 mL of a 0.200 mol L–1 standard solution. What mass of
potassium dichromate should be weighed out? (2 marks)
c With the standard solution prepared, you are now ready to perform your redox
titration. For the titration, 1.25 g of PotOx was weighed and dissolved in de-ionised
water (as per the manufacturer’s instructions) made up to the 200 mL mark of a
volumetric flask. Describe the next steps involved in conducting this experiment,
including the glassware required. (5 marks)
d The oxidation and reduction half-equations occurring during this titration are provided
below. What is the overall reaction?
Reduction: Cr2O7
2–(aq) + 14H+(aq) + 6e–
→ 2Cr3+(aq) + 7H2O(l)
Oxidation: C2O4
2–(aq) → 2CO2(g) + 2e–
 (1 mark)
e Having completed three titrations, you determine the average titre to be 15.00 mL. What is
the amount, in mol, of potassium dichromate needed to reach the end point? (1 mark)
f What is the concentration of oxalic acid, in mol L–1, in the sample? (1 mark)
g Is the customer hypothesis about PotOx correct? (1 mark)
12 A scientist has received two samples of new products to store in their laboratory. One of the
samples is a bullion bar created from pure silver (melting point = 961.8°C). The other is a
cleaning product that is a high-quality vinegar, composed of acetic acid (boiling point = 118°C)
in water (boiling point = 100°C).
a Explain why melting point determination is a more suitable technique than distillation to
assess the purity of the bullion bar. (2 marks)
b Three different batches of bullion bar were received from different suppliers. The results
from the melting point determination are presented below.
Batch 1 Batch 2 Batch 3
Melting point (°C) 961.6–962.0 958.2–960.5 961.7–961.9
Which of the three batches is impure? What features of the data indicate this? (2 marks)
c Draw a diagram of the experimental set-up that you would use to test the purity and
components of the cleaning product. d Describe the results that you would expect from the experiment described in part c if the
mixture did not contain any other contaminants. (2 marks)
(2 marks)
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
418
13 A range of samples has been produced from conducting organic reactions. These samples have
been labelled 1–5. The scientist that created the samples has passed them to you to analyse.
To ensure that the testing is unbiased, they have not told you what the expected compound is
in each sample. They have asked you to conduct a number of qualitative tests and report back
your findings on what functional groups the potential samples contain. The results of your
analyses are found in the table below.
Qualitative test performed
Sample
number
Bromine
water test
Reaction with
potassium
dichromate
Litmus test Reaction with
alcohol
Baeyer’s test
1 Becomes
colourless
in dark
Sample is
orange
Blue litmus paper
stays blue
No smell
produced
Red precipitate
forms
2 Becomes
colourless
in light
Sample is
orange
Blue litmus paper
turns red
Ester odour Sample is
purple
3 Becomes
colourless
in light
Sample is
orange
Blue litmus paper
stays blue
No smell
produced
Sample is
purple
4 Becomes
colourless
in light
Sample is
green
Blue litmus paper
stays blue
No smell
produced
Sample is
purple
5 Inconclusive Sample is
green
Blue litmus paper
stays blue
Ester odour Red precipitate
forms
a Which two samples have conflicting results? Explain your choices. (3 marks)
b Assuming all of the results are correct for sample 3, what can you conclude about
this compound? (2 marks)
c Which sample contains more than one functional group and what functional
groups does it contain? (2 marks)
d Since you have done such a good job with the initial samples, the scientist sends through
a sixth sample, which they need identified. They know that this sample is either an alkane
or an alkene, but aren’t sure which. Design an experiment that you could use to determine
what the sixth sample is. Make sure that you include a description of the results that may be
observed and what you could conclude from them. (5 marks)
e The results show that the sixth sample does in fact contain a carbon–carbon double bond.
However, the scientist would like more information and asks you to determine the number
of carbon–carbon double bonds that are present. You are given the following information:
m(sample 6) = 12.2 g
M(sample 6) = 304.5 g mol–1
You find that this reacts completely with a 200.0 mL 0.802 mol L–1 iodine solution. How
many carbon–carbon double bonds are present in the molecule in sample 6? (3 marks)
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
420
UNIT
4
HOW ARE CARBON-BASED COMPOUNDS DESIGNED
FOR PURPOSE?
CHAPTER
11
INSTRUMENTAL ANALYSIS OF
ORGANIC COMPOUNDS
INTRODUCTION
VIDEO
INSTRUMENTAL
ANALYSIS
OF ORGANIC
COMPOUNDS
Introduction
Technological advancements are happening all around us – electric vehicles,
artificial intelligence, mRNA vaccines – and the world of chemistry is no
different! The advancement of highly sophisticated instruments has brought
a whole new dimension to the field and the use of these is often referred to as
instrumental analysis. It’s a fascinating area of chemistry that combines our theoretical
knowledge with state-of-the-art technology to help us delve into the intricate details
of chemical compounds. It’s like Sherlock Holmes meeting James Bond in the realm of
science – using advanced gadgets and profound knowledge to solve mysteries at the
molecular level.
These instruments are not just useful in a laboratory setting, they also have real-life applications.
Have you ever wondered how forensic scientists can identify the minutest trace of a substance
at a crime scene? Or how pharmaceutical companies ensure that the medicine you take is safe
and effective? Instrumental techniques, such as mass spectrometry (MS), infrared spectroscopy
(IR) and nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy, are the unsung heroes behind the
scenes. Mass spectrometry allows us to analyse the composition of a sample down to its individual
atoms. Infrared spectroscopy can identify specific functional groups in molecules, aiding in the
identification of substances. And NMR spectroscopy? It provides information about the structure
of a molecule, helping us understand how it’s put together. From ensuring the purity of drinking
water and developing new medicines, to exploring the vastness of space, instrumental analysis
plays a critical role in many facets of modern life. In this chapter, you will learn about the principles
behind these techniques and how the data they generate can be analysed.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
421
Curriculum
Area of Study 2 Outcome 2
How are organic compounds analysed and used?
Study Design: Learning intentions – at the end of the
chapter I will be able to:
•
•
Applications of mass spectrometry
(excluding features of instrumentation
and operation) and interpretation of
qualitative and quantitative data, including
identification of molecular ion peak,
determination of molecular mass and
identification of simple fragments
The roles and applications of laboratory
and instrumental analysis, with reference
to product purity and the identification of
organic compounds or functional groups in
isolation or within a mixture
11A  Mass spectrometry
11A.1  Describe the principle of mass
spectrometry (MS)
11A.2  Define ‘base peak’
11A.3  Define ‘molecular ion peak’
11A.4  Identify the base peak and molecular
ion peak from a given mass spectrum
11A.5  State that the molecular ion peak
corresponds to the molecular mass of
the compound
11A.6  Determine the ions that correspond to
fragments in a given mass spectrum
11A.7  Determine the identity of a compound
from given mass spectrometry data
•
Identification of bond types by qualitative
infrared spectroscopy (IR) data analysis
using characteristic absorption bands
11B  Infrared spectroscopy
11B.1
 Describe the principle of infrared (IR)
spectroscopy
11B.2  Identify bond types present in
a sample from given infrared
spectroscopy data
11B.3  Determine the identity of organic
compounds from provided
options using given infrared
spectroscopy data
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
422
Study Design: Learning intentions – at the end of the
chapter I will be able to:
•
•
•
Structural determination of organic
compounds by low resolution carbon-13
nuclear magnetic resonance (13C-NMR)
spectral analysis, using chemical shift
values to deduce the number and nature of
different carbon environments
Structural determination of organic
compounds by low and high resolution
proton nuclear magnetic resonance
(1H-NMR) spectral analysis, using chemical
shift values, integration curves (where
the height is proportional to the area
underneath a peak) and peak splitting
patterns (excluding coupling constants),
and application of the n+1 rule (where n
is the number of neighbouring protons) to
deduce the number and nature of different
proton environments
Deduction of the structures of simple
organic compounds using a combination
of mass spectrometry (MS), infrared
spectroscopy (IR), proton nuclear magnetic
resonance (1H-NMR) and carbon-13
nuclear magnetic resonance (13C-NMR)
(limited to data analysis)
11C  Nuclear magnetic resonance
spectroscopy
11C.1  Describe the principle of nuclear
magnetic resonance (NMR)
spectroscopy
11C.2  Determine the structure of an organic
compound from given carbon-13
NMR data
11C.3  Determine the structure of an organic
compound from given proton NMR
data
11C.4  Determine the structure of organic
compounds using a combination of
given MS, IR and NMR data
•
The principles of chromatography, including
high-performance liquid chromatography
(HPLC) and the use of retention times and
the construction of a calibration curve to
determine the concentration of an organic
compound in a solution (excluding features
of instrumentation and operation)
11D  Chromatography
11D.1  Describe the principle of high-
performance liquid chromatography
(HPLC)
11D.2  Describe the qualitative purity of a
substance from given HPLC data
11D.3  Describe how retention times from
HPLC data can be used to help in the
identification of organic compounds
11D.4  Construct a calibration curve from
given HPLC data
11D.5  Calculate the concentration of an
organic compound from a given
calibration curve and HPLC data
VCE Chemistry Study Design extracts © VCAA; reproduced by permission.
Glossary
Absorption band
Base peak
Chemical shift
Fingerprint region
Integration curve
Mobile phase
Molecular ion peak
Multiplet
Peak splitting
Retention time
Stationary phase
Wavenumber
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
CONCEPT MAP
423
Concept map
11A Mass spectrometry
Technique for determining the mass
and identity of organic compounds
Relative intensity
11B Infrared spectroscopy
Technique for identifying functional
groups in organic compounds
Transmittance (%)
100
80
60
40
20
0
100
80
60
40
20
0
Base peak, relative
intensity = 100
Molecular
ion peak,
m/z = 46.0
10 15 20 25 30 35
m/z
40 45
4000 3000 2000 1500 1000 500
Wavenumber (cm–1)
Chemical shift
(ppm)
Relative peak
area
1.23 3
11C Nuclear magnetic resonance
spectroscopy
Technique for determining the
identity and structure of organic
compounds
2.61 1
3.69 2
7 6
5 4 3 2 1 0
ppm
11 10 9 8
11D Chromatography
Technique for separating organic
compounds in mixtures, analysing
purity and determining
concentration
Peak area
3000000
2500000
2000000
1500000
1000000
500000
0
0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20
Sample concentrations (mg L–1)
See the Interactive Textbook for an interactive version of this concept map
interlinked with all concept maps for the course.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
424 CHAPTER 11 INSTRUMENTAL ANALYSIS OF ORGANIC COMPOUNDS
11A Mass spectrometry
Study Design:
•
Applications of mass spectrometry (excluding features
of instrumentation and operation) and interpretation of
qualitative and quantitative data, including identification
of molecular ion peak, determination of molecular mass
and identification of simple fragments
•
The roles and applications of laboratory and
instrumental analysis, with reference to product
purity and the identification of organic compounds or
functional groups in isolation or within a mixture
Glossary:
Base peak
Molecular ion peak
ENGAGE
Chemistry that’s out of this world!
Have you ever been travelling
somewhere by plane and, as you
were passing through the security
checkpoints, been taken aside to
have an extra test that involved
swabbing your carry-on luggage,
your clothes and your shoes? This
screening measure is used to detect
traces of explosives and uses an
extremely sensitive and accurate
device called a mass spectrometer.
Incredibly, mass spectrometry
hasn’t only proved to be a useful
Figure 11A–1 The Mars Curiosity rover
technique on this planet. The Mars Curiosity rover, which landed on Mars in 2012, has
now been collecting data about our planetary neighbour for over a decade. Part of the
information that is being analysed by Curiosity is the detection of key elements and
organic compounds that may make Mars suitable for habitation. This is done through
an in-built mass spectrometer within the rover itself. In this section, you will learn about
mass spectrometry and how to interpret the data that it generates to gain qualitative and
quantitative information about organic compounds.
EXPLAIN
What is mass spectrometry (MS)?
Mass spectrometry is a powerful analytical technique used to determine the masses and
abundances of atoms and molecules in a sample. It is used in many areas of chemistry,
including drug discovery, environmental analysis and forensic science. The principle of
mass spectrometry is based on the fact that ions, which are atoms or molecules that have
gained or lost one or more electrons, can be separated based on their mass-to-charge ratio
(m/z). The process involves three main steps: ionisation, separation and detection.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
11A MASS SPECTROMETRY
425
In the first step, the sample is ionised to produce positively charged ions. It works by
vaporising the sample and passing it through a stream of high-energy electrons. These
electrons collide with the sample molecules or atoms, knocking one or more electrons off
and creating positive ions.
For an example molecule, M, the equation for this process could be written as:
M → M+ + e–
Ions in the mass spectrometer are unstable and can fragment further. For example, a bond
in the M+ ion may break, producing two smaller fragments, X and Y. One of X or Y will
have a positive charge and the other will be uncharged. For example, the fragmentation of
M+ may proceed as:
M+ → X+ + Y
or
M+ → X + Y+
Magnetic field
Deflection
Ionisation
Acceleration
Detector
Electron beam
Displayed
Sample injection
spectrum
Figure 11A–2 A diagrammatic representation of a mass spectrometer, highlighting the different
stages of the process, from ionisation of the sample through to detection at the end
Once ionised, the ions are accelerated through an electric field and separated based on
their m/z ratio by a magnetic field. The separated ions are then detected, typically by a
detector that measures the ion current as a function of m/z. This process is illustrated in
Figure 11A–2, although it is important to realise that you aren’t required to understand the
principles of the instrument.
Analysing mass spectrometry data
Mass spectrometry is a powerful analytical technique used to determine the molecular
weight and structural information of organic compounds. To analyse mass spectrometry
data of organic compounds, it is important to first understand the terms ‘base peak’ and
‘molecular ion’. The base peak refers to the highest intensity peak in a mass spectrum, while
the molecular ion peak represents the molecular weight of the compound. It is important
to note that occasionally more than one molecular ion peak can be present. This occurs in
instances where the analysed compound contains elements with multiple stable isotopes.
A common example involves organic compounds containing a chlorine atom, which
would have two molecular ion peaks – one corresponding to the compound containing
chlorine-35 and the other to the compound containing chlorine-37.
Base peak
the highest
intensity peak in
a mass spectrum
Molecular ion
peak
the ion peak that
represents the
molecular weight
of the compound
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
426 CHAPTER 11 INSTRUMENTAL ANALYSIS OF ORGANIC COMPOUNDS
Mass spectrometry data is typically displayed as a graph of relative intensity versus mass-
to-charge ratio (m/z), where the mass-to-charge ratio represents the mass of the ion divided
by its charge. The mass-to-charge ratio is represented on the x-axis, while the relative
intensity is represented on the y-axis. The peaks in the mass spectrum correspond to the
various ions produced by the compound during the ionisation process.
The mass-to-charge ratio is an important parameter in mass spectrometry because it
provides information about the mass of the ion, as well as its charge. The relative intensity
of each peak in the mass spectrum provides information about the abundance of each ion
produced during the ionisation process. The most abundant peak in the spectrum is the
base peak, which is assigned a relative intensity of 100%. Other peaks are assigned a relative
intensity based on their abundance relative to the base peak.
In addition to the base peak and molecular ion, there are other important features in a mass
spectrum, such as fragmentation peaks and isotopic peaks, which can provide valuable
information about the compound. Fragmentation peaks arise from the fragmentation of
the molecular ion during the ionisation process, while isotopic peaks are caused by the
presence of isotopes in the sample. The analysis of these peaks, along with the base peak
and molecular ion, can provide important structural information about the compound,
allowing for its identification.
100
Base peak, relative
intensity = 100
80
VIDEO 11A–1
IMPORTANT
FEATURES
OF A MASS
SPECTRUM
Relative intensity
60
40
20
Molecular
ion peak,
m/z = 46.0
0
10 15 20 25 30 35
m/z
Figure 11A–3 Mass spectrum for ethanol (C2H5OH)
40 45
WORKSHEET
11A–1
ANALYSING
MASS
SPECTROMETRY
DATA
DOC
Figure 11A–3 shows the mass spectrum that would be produced for a sample of ethanol.
There are a number of key features that we can observe in this spectrum. Firstly, the
molecular ion is the peak with the highest m/z (that is, the one furthest to the right). This
tells us that ethanol has a molecular weight of 46.0 g mol–1. It is also possible to observe the
base peak, which is seen at an m/z of 31.0. This is the most abundant peak in the spectrum
and so is given the relative intensity of 100. As this peak has an m/z of 15 less than the
molecular ion, it could be suggested that this is ethanol having lost a methyl (–CH3) group.
Determining the fragments that correspond to given peaks in a mass spectrum will be
covered in Worked examples 11A–1 and 11A–2.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
11A MASS SPECTROMETRY
427
Worked example 11A–1: Using the molecular ion to differentiate
between compounds
VIDEO
WORKED
EXAMPLE 11A–1
Mass spectrometry data have been generated from an organic compound. By analysing
the spectrum below, determine whether the compound is ethanol or ethanoic acid.
100
Relative intensity
80
60
40
20
0
10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45
m/z
50 55 60 65 70 75
Solution
Logic Process
Step 1 Determine the molecular masses
of ethanol and ethanoic acid.
M(ethanol) = 46
M(ethanoic acid) = 60
Step 2 Identify the mass of the
molecular ion.
Molecular ion mass = 60
Step 3 Determine which compound is
present.
As the molecular ion mass corresponds to the
molecular mass of ethanoic acid, this must
be the compound present in the sample.
Worked example 11A–2: Determining fragments from a given compound
VIDEO
WORKED
EXAMPLE 11A–2
Determine the ions that produce fragments occurring at an m/z of 15, 43 and 86 in a
mass spectrum of hexane.
Solution
Logic Process
Step 1 Write the semi-structural formula of hexane. Hexane = CH3CH2CH2CH2CH2CH3
Step 2 Determine the molecular mass of hexane. M(hexane) = 86
Step 3 Determine the masses produced
by fragmenting hexane at each
carbon-carbon bond.
CH3 = 15
CH3CH2 = 29
CH3CH2CH2 = 43
CH3CH2CH2CH2 = 57
CH3CH2CH2CH2CH2 = 71
Step 4 Identify and write the fragments
corresponding to the masses in
the question.
m/z of 15 = [CH3]+
m/z of 43 = [CH3CH2CH2]+
m/z of 86 = molecular ion
= [CH3CH2CH2CH2CH2CH3]+
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
428 CHAPTER 11 INSTRUMENTAL ANALYSIS OF ORGANIC COMPOUNDS
Check-in questions – Set 1
1 The x-axis of a mass spectrum is often labelled m/z. What do ‘m’ and ‘z’ represent in
this instance?
2 Explain why ethane and propane both produce fragments in mass spectrometry with an
m/z of 29, but methane does not.
3 Would you expect to see the same molecular ion for butane and methylpropane? Explain
why or why not.
Mass spectrometry for identification of compounds
Due to its sensitivity and nature of analysis, mass spectrometry can be an incredibly
powerful technique for the identification of compounds in mixtures. As described earlier,
compounds will produce characteristic fragmentation patterns when they are ionised
within a mass spectrometer. In a sample containing a single compound, the analysis can
be performed relatively easily to determine the identity of the compound. However, in a
mixture, this process can become far more complicated. Indeed, many samples that are
analysed by mass spectrometry do involve complex mixtures, such as blood samples that
are used for drug testing of athletes. Fortunately, in these instances, the large numbers
of fragmentation patterns that are detected can be analysed using specialised computer
software to search through large databases. This allows for quite definitive conclusions to
be drawn about the identity of organic components within these complex mixtures.
VIDEO 11A–2
SKILLS: MASS
SPECTROMETRY
SKILLS
11A SKILLS
Mass spectrometry skills
In Worked example 11A–2, we looked at a question that involved determining the fragments
that corresponded to given m/z values from mass spectrometry data. In this instance, the
steps shown involved determining the masses of all the different fragments that could be
produced by breaking hexane at each carbon–carbon bond. The masses of these were then
calculated by adding together the masses of all the elements in the fragment.
However, you may get questions that involve a slightly more complicated molecule
or more complex spectra that you are trying to figure out. In these instances, it can
be useful to flip the way that you attempt to solve these problems and start with the
molecular ion and work out what has been subtracted from that. To illustrate this, let’s
look at the mass spectrum for hexane.
100
80
Relative intensity
60
40
20
0
10
20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90
m/z
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
11A MASS SPECTROMETRY
429
As in Worked example 11A–2, we can see the molecular ion peak at an m/z of 86.
However, what if we were asked to identify the fragment that created the peak at an m/z
of 71? As in the worked example, we could try to identify what fragments add up to 71.
A quicker method, however, would be to realise that an m/z of 71 is equivalent to the
molecular ion (m/z = 86) with a loss of 15. A common fragment in mass spectrometry is
–CH3
+, which has an m/z of 15. Knowing this, we can quickly identify that the m/z peak at
71 is the molecular ion having lost a methyl group. This highlights that it can sometimes
be more efficient to think about what might have been lost from the molecular ion, rather
than trying to add up fragments to get the correct m/z.
Section 11A questions
1 What does the base peak represent in a mass spectrum?
2 What is the molecular ion in a mass spectrum, and why is it important?
3 What is the mass-to-charge ratio in mass spectrometry, and how is it used to
analyse data?
4 You have a sample that contains an unknown compound. You know that it's either
pentane (C5H12) or 2-methylbutane (C4H10). You run a mass spectrometry test and find
a molecular ion peak at an m/z of 72. Based on this data, which compound is likely to be
in your sample? Explain your answer.
5 Propane (C3H8) exhibits a molecular ion peak at m/z = 44 in its mass spectrum. What
might be a fragment responsible for a peak observed at m/z = 29?
6 A sample of butanol (C4H9OH) is subjected to mass spectrometry.
a Identify the m/z value that would correspond to the molecular ion.
b If a prominent peak is observed at m/z = 31, what fragment might this represent?
c Propose another possible fragment for butanol and the corresponding m/z value you
would expect to see for it.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
430 CHAPTER 11 INSTRUMENTAL ANALYSIS OF ORGANIC COMPOUNDS
11B
Infrared spectroscopy
Study Design:
•
Identification of bond types by qualitative infrared
spectroscopy (IR) data analysis using characteristic
absorption bands
Glossary:
Absorption band
Fingerprint region
Wavenumber
ENGAGE
The laws of science or the science of the laws?
In Australia, as with most other countries in the world, there are laws regarding the level
of blood alcohol that a person can legally drive with. For drivers with a full license, the
legal limit is 0.05 grams of alcohol per 100 millilitres of blood. For probationary drivers
here, the concentration needs to be 0.00 grams of alcohol per 100 millilitres of blood.
Due to the dangers of drink driving, police regularly perform random checks of drivers
using breathalysers. A breathalyser is able to measure alcohol in a person’s breath and
then use this to calculate the alcohol concentration in the blood. If a driver fails this test,
they often undergo a second, more sensitive, test. The technology used in the second test
involves a form of spectroscopy called infrared (IR) spectroscopy. In this section, you
will learn about the principles of IR spectroscopy and how the data generated from it can
be used to determine the presence of functional groups within organic compounds.
Figure 11B–1 In a breathalyser (or breath analyser), breath is blown into the sample chamber and
analysed by a beam of infrared radiation to detect the concentration of alcohol in your blood.
Absorption band
a range of
wavelengths in
the IR spectrum
where absorption
of infrared
light occurs
EXPLAIN
What is infrared (IR) spectroscopy?
Infrared spectroscopy is a powerful tool for identifying functional groups in organic
compounds. This is because different bond types absorb infrared radiation at characteristic
frequencies, which are referred to as absorption bands. The position of these absorption
bands provides valuable information about the bond types present in the molecule, which
can be used to identify the functional groups.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
11B INFRARED SPECTROSCOPY
431
Analysing IR spectroscopy data
The fingerprint region in an infrared spectrum for organic compounds refers to the range
of wavenumbers, typically between 500 cm–1 and 1500 cm–1, where a complex pattern of
absorption bands occurs due to the combination and deformation vibrations of all the
atoms in the molecule. This region is often referred to as the fingerprint region because
the unique pattern of absorption bands serves as a unique ‘fingerprint’ for the compound,
enabling it to be identified.
The fingerprint region is useful because it provides a wealth of information about the
overall structure and composition of the molecule. In this region, each compound has
its own unique absorption spectrum, which can be used to identify the compound by
comparison with known spectra in a library. The pattern of peaks in the fingerprint region
is due to the molecular vibrations that involve multiple bonds, which are specific to the
individual molecule. Since the fingerprint region is unique for each molecule, it is a useful
region for identifying unknown compounds. The fingerprint region is often the last region
analysed because it is the most complex, and the pattern of absorption bands is unique to
each molecule. Therefore, it is used as a confirmatory test to verify the identification of a
compound after functional group analysis has been performed.
Besides the fingerprint region, IR spectroscopy provides information about the different
bond types present in a compound. This is possible because different bond types have
characteristic wavenumber ranges where they absorb (Table 11B–1). For example, the
carbonyl group (C=O) has a characteristic absorption band in the range of 1630–1820 cm–1
,
while the hydroxyl group (–OH) has a broad absorption band in the range of 3200–3600 cm–1
.
Similarly, the amino group (–NH2) has a characteristic absorption band in the range of
3300–3500 cm–1. By analysing the positions and intensities of these absorption bands, the
functional groups present in the molecule can be determined and this information is then
used to identify the compound. In addition, the absence of certain absorption bands can
also be used to rule out the presence of particular functional groups.
Table 11B–1 Characteristic ranges for infrared absorption
Fingerprint
region
the part of
an infrared
spectrum that is
found between
500 cm–1 and
1500 cm–1
,
which, like a
fingerprint, is
unique and
characteristic of
a compound
Wavenumber
a measure
of frequency
denoting the
number of
wavelengths per
unit distance,
usually in
reciprocal
centimetres
(cm–1), with
higher values
corresponding
to higher energy
transitions in
a molecule
Bond Wavenumber (cm–1)
C–Cl (chloroalkanes) 600–800
C–O (alcohols, esters, ethers) 1050–1410
C=C (alkenes) 1620–1680
C=0 (amides) 1630–1680
C=0 (aldehydes) 1660–1745
C=0 (acids) 1680–1740
C=0 (ketones) 1680–1850
C=0 (esters) 1720–1840
C–H (alkanes, alkenes, arenes) 2850–3090
O–H (acid) 2500–3500
O–H (alcohols) 3200–3600
N–H (amines and amides) 3300–3500
© VCAA 2020 Chemistry Examination Data Book
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
432 CHAPTER 11 INSTRUMENTAL ANALYSIS OF ORGANIC COMPOUNDS
Let’s look at an example using the infrared spectrum for ethanol (Figure 11B–2). From this,
we can see that in the fingerprint region there is a complicated series of absorption bands. It
is likely that the signal from the C–O bond is in this region (1050–1410 cm–1), but it is hard
to definitively locate it and so it isn’t usually a focus of the analysis. A prominent feature of
the spectrum is the absorption band between 3200 and 3600 cm–1, which is the signal for
the O–H bond. Also, we can see an absorption band between 2850 and 3090 cm–1, which
corresponds to the signal from the C–H bonds.
Lastly, although we are talking about absorption bands, you may notice that the y-axis of
the spectrum in Figure 11B–2 is labelled as ‘Transmittance (%)’. Absorbance is a measure
of the amount of radiation absorbed by the sample, whereas transmittance is a measure of
the amount not absorbed and therefore transmitted through the sample. A high absorbance
will be seen as a transmittance trough on the spectrum.
100
80
VIDEO 11B–1
IMPORTANT
FEATURES
IN INFRARED
SPECTROSCOPY
DATA
Transmittance (%)
60
40
20
WORKSHEET
11B–1
ANALYSING
INFRARED
SPECTROSCOPY
DATA
0
DOC
4000 3000 2000 1500 1000 500
Wavenumber (cm–1)
Figure 11B–2 Infrared spectrum for ethanol (C2H5OH)
VIDEO
WORKED
EXAMPLE 11B–1
Worked example 11B–1: Analysing the IR spectrum of a compound
A sample with the molecular formula C4H8O2 is analysed by infrared spectroscopy and
the spectrum produced is shown below. By analysing this spectrum, explain why the
sample must contain an ester and not a carboxylic acid.
100
Transmittance (%)
50
0
4000 3000 2000 1500 1000
Wavenumber (cm–1)
500
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
11B INFRARED SPECTROSCOPY
433
Solution
Logic Process
Step 1 Determine the absorption bands that
you would expect to see for an ester.
1720–1840 cm–1 for C=O (ester)
Step 2 Determine the absorption bands
that you would expect to see for a
carboxylic acid.
1680–1740 cm–1 for C=O (acid)
2500–3500 cm–1 for O–H (acid)
Step 3 Determine the absorption bands
present in the spectrum.
1730–1760 cm–1
2950–3050 cm–1
Step 4 Use the information from Steps 1–3 to
explain why the sample is an ester and
not a carboxylic acid.
The presence of an absorption band
at 1730–1760 cm–1 indicates the
presence of a C=O bond, but could be
from an ester or a carboxylic acid.
The presence of an absorption band
at 2950–3050 cm–1 indicates the
presence of a C–H bond, but could be
from an ester or a carboxylic acid.
The absence of a broad peak at
2500–3500 cm–1 suggests it cannot
be a carboxylic acid and so it must be
an ester.
Check-in questions – Set 1
1 In the context of infrared spectroscopy, what is meant by the term ‘fingerprint region’?
2 What information can infrared spectroscopy data tell you about organic compounds?
3 What bond type does an absorption band at the following wavenumber ranges represent?
a 1620 cm–1 to 1680 cm–1
b 2500 cm–1 to 3500 cm–1
c 3300 cm–1 to 3500 cm–1
11B SKILLS
VIDEO 11B–2
SKILLS: IR
SPECTROSCOPY
QUESTIONS
IR spectroscopy questions
Having explored the analysis of IR spectroscopy data in this section, you may think
that the best approach is simply to look at the spectrum and compare the absorption
bands seen with a table of wavenumber ranges corresponding to bond types. While this
strategy will definitely be a good starting point, there are instances when it may not
be enough to give you a definitive answer or there is an alternative method that may
provide a quicker path to the solution.
Let’s think about this using the example question below.
Question:
You are provided with an infrared spectrum of an unknown compound. You are told
that the compound has the molecular formula C2H6O. Using the spectrum, determine
the bond types present and suggest what the compound may be.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
434 CHAPTER 11 INSTRUMENTAL ANALYSIS OF ORGANIC COMPOUNDS
100
80
Transmittance (%)
60
40
20
0
4000 3000 2000 1500 1000 500
Wavenumber (cm–1)
Answer:
If we focus on the left-hand side of the spectrum, we can see an absorption band within
the range of 3200–3500 cm–1. Using Table 11B–1, we would be able to determine that
this could correspond to an O–H or an N–H bond type. However, using the additional
information provided in the question in the form of the molecular formula, we can
automatically disregard the N–H bond option, as there are no nitrogen atoms present.
As this must be an O–H bond type for alcohols, and there is an additional absorption
band corresponding to a C–H bond type, we can combine this with the molecular
formula provided to suggest the unknown compound is ethanol.
For a question like this, it could be a beneficial first step to cross out options in the table
that are not possible based on the formula information provided. This will ensure that
you don’t make mistakes during your analysis and make the process quicker.
Section 11B questions
1 What is the principle of infrared spectroscopy, and how does it work?
2 What is the fingerprint region in an infrared spectrum, and why is it important?
3 What is the process for analysing infrared spectroscopy data, and what information can
be obtained?
4 In an infrared spectrum, you notice a broad, strong absorption peak between
3200–3600 cm–1
.
a What functional group is most likely present in the compound?
b What other evidence in the spectrum might you look for to support this?
5 A scientist in an organic chemistry lab has performed a reaction to produce ethanol
from chloroethane. To test whether the reaction has been successful, the scientist
performs infrared spectroscopy on a sample of the unused reactant and a sample of the
reaction material.
a Using Table 11B–1, identify the absorption bands that you might expect to see for
each sample.
b From your answer to part a, would any absorption bands be difficult to observe in an
IR spectra? Explain.
c Describe what information from the obtained IR spectrum would help you determine
if the reaction the scientist had conducted had been successful.
d What other technique might provide useful additional data to help determine
whether the reaction had been successful?
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
11C NUCLEAR MAGNETIC RESONANCE SPECTROSCOPY
435
11C
Nuclear magnetic resonance
spectroscopy
Study Design:
•
Structural determination of organic compounds by
low resolution carbon-13 nuclear magnetic resonance
(13C-NMR) spectral analysis, using chemical shift values
to deduce the number and nature of different carbon
environments
•
Structural determination of organic compounds by low
and high resolution proton nuclear magnetic resonance
(1H-NMR) spectral analysis, using chemical shift values,
integration curves (where the height is proportional to
the area underneath a peak) and peak splitting patterns
(excluding coupling constants), and application of the
n+1 rule (where n is the number of neighbouring protons)
to deduce the number and nature of different proton
environments
•
Deduction of the structures of simple organic compounds
using a combination of mass spectrometry (MS), infrared
spectroscopy (IR), proton nuclear magnetic resonance
(1H-NMR) and carbon-13 nuclear magnetic resonance
(13C-NMR) (limited to data analysis)
Glossary:
Chemical shift
Integration curve
Multiplet
Peak splitting
ENGAGE
The brains behind MRI
One of the greatest advances in modern medicine has been the development of magnetic
resonance imaging or MRI. MRI has provided doctors with a relatively quick and non-
invasive way to obtain high-resolution images of the skeletal system, organs, tissues
and central nervous system. It has become an invaluable tool for the diagnosis of
neurological conditions like multiple sclerosis and stroke, as well as structural issues or
blockages in the heart. MRI is also extensively used for the screening and diagnosis of
cancer in multiple organs, such as the liver, pancreas and ovaries. For their contribution
to the discovery of MRI technology and its subsequent contribution to the medical
field, Sir Peter Mansfield from the University of Nottingham and Paul Lauterbur from
Stony Brook University were awarded the 2003 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine.
In this section, you will be learning about nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR), the
principles of which MRI
machines are based on.
As well as understanding
two different types of
NMR, you will also gain an
understanding of how they
can be used to produce data
that allows for the structure
of organic compounds to
be determined.
Figure 11C–1 A patient being positioned for an MRI scan (left).
An MRI scan of the brain (right)
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
436 CHAPTER 11 INSTRUMENTAL ANALYSIS OF ORGANIC COMPOUNDS
Chemical shift
the position of
a signal in the
nuclear magnetic
resonance
(NMR) spectrum
relative to the
signal produced
by a reference
compound,
usually
tetramethylsilane
(TMS); measured
in parts per
million, ppm
EXPLAIN
What is nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR)?
Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) is a technique used to study the structure of molecules.
It works based on the fact that certain atomic nuclei, such as those of hydrogen or carbon,
have an intrinsic magnetic moment or spin. When a sample containing these nuclei is
placed in a strong magnetic field, the spins of the nuclei align either parallel or antiparallel
to the magnetic field.
When a magnetic field is applied to the nuclei, they can absorb and emit electromagnetic
radiation at certain frequencies, just like tuning to a radio station. This is because the spins
of the nuclei can flip between the two energy levels, and the energy difference between
these levels determines the frequency of electromagnetic radiation that can be absorbed or
emitted. By measuring these frequencies, NMR can provide information about the structure
and dynamics of molecules, including their composition, arrangement, and interactions
with other molecules. This makes NMR an essential tool in many fields, including
chemistry, biochemistry and medicine.
Carbon-13 NMR
Carbon-13 is one of two naturally occurring stable isotopes of carbon, the other being
carbon-12. Carbon-13 NMR (also referred to as 13C NMR), works by measuring the
magnetic properties of the carbon-13 nuclei in a molecule. The principle behind carbon-13
NMR is based on the fact that carbon-13 nuclei possess a magnetic moment, which is
a property of some atomic nuclei that makes them behave like tiny bar magnets. When
placed in a strong magnetic field, the carbon-13 nuclei align themselves either with or
against the field, depending on their energy levels. By applying a radiofrequency pulse, the
nuclei can be made to absorb energy and ‘flip’ their alignment. As the nuclei relax back
to their original state, they emit energy in the form of electromagnetic radiation. The
frequency of this radiation is unique to each carbon atom, and it is detected by a receiver
coil to generate a carbon-13 NMR spectrum.
Analysing carbon-13 NMR data
NMR spectra show the signals produced by the nuclei of the atoms in the molecule being
studied, and the position of these signals is referred to as the chemical shift. The chemical
shift values give important information about the environment of the atoms in the
molecule, which can help identify the molecule’s structure (Table 11C–1).
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
11C NUCLEAR MAGNETIC RESONANCE SPECTROSCOPY
437
Table 11C–1 Typical chemical shift values for carbon-13 NMR data relative to TMS = 0
Type of carbon Chemical shift (ppm)
R–CH3 8–25
R–CH2–R 20–45
R3–CH 40–60
R4–C 36–45
R–CH2–X 15–80
R3C–NH2, R3C–NR 35–70
R–CH2–OH 50–90
RC≡CR 75–95
R2C=CR2 110–150
RCOOH 160–185
R
RO
165–175
C O
R
H
190–200
C O
R2C=O 205–220
© VCAA 2020 Chemistry Examination Data Book
The chemical shift is measured in parts per million (ppm) and is relative to a reference
compound. The reference compound typically used is tetramethylsilane (TMS), which
is given a chemical shift of 0 ppm. The chemical shift is influenced by the magnetic field
experienced by the nucleus, which is in turn affected by the environment of the atom.
Atoms with different electron environments will produce signals at different chemical shift
values. For example, atoms that are in a more electron-rich environment will have signals
at lower chemical shift values, while atoms in a more electron-poor environment will have
signals at higher chemical shift values.
The number of peaks in a carbon-13 NMR
spectrum corresponds to the number of
carbon environments. By analysing the
chemical shift values and comparing to
tables of reference data, scientists can
identify the nature of the different carbon
environments and get information about
the overall structure of the molecule.
Figure 11C–2 shows the carbon-13 NMR
spectrum for ethanol. It can be observed
that there are two peaks, which correspond
to the two carbon environments in ethanol.
These peaks occur at a chemical shift of 20
ppm (the carbon in the –CH3 environment)
and 58 ppm (the carbon in the –CH2–OH
environment).
200 180 160 140 120 100
ppm
80 60 40 20 0
Figure 11C–2 Carbon-13 NMR spectrum for ethanol
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
438 CHAPTER 11 INSTRUMENTAL ANALYSIS OF ORGANIC COMPOUNDS
Hydrogen-1 NMR
Hydrogen NMR (also referred to as proton NMR or 1H NMR) is a type of nuclear magnetic
resonance (NMR) spectroscopy that is used to study the properties of hydrogen-containing
molecules. Hydrogen is abundant in nature and has a magnetic moment or spin, making it
an ideal target for NMR spectroscopy. By exploiting the magnetic properties of hydrogen
nuclei, important information about the chemical structure and dynamics of molecules can
be obtained.
Hydrogen NMR works in the same way as carbon-13 NMR by placing a sample containing
hydrogen atoms in a strong magnetic field, causing the hydrogen atoms to align either
parallel or anti-parallel to the field. By applying an oscillating electromagnetic field
at a specific frequency, the hydrogen atoms can be excited and emit a signal that can
be detected. The frequency of the signal depends on the chemical environment of the
hydrogen atom, such as the type of atoms attached to it and their spatial arrangement. By
analysing the hydrogen NMR spectrum, information about the chemical structure and
dynamics of the molecule can be obtained, including the number of hydrogen atoms, the
types of functional groups present and the connectivity of the atoms within the molecule.
Hydrogen NMR is widely used in many fields, including chemistry, biochemistry and
medicine, to study the properties of molecules and to develop new drugs and materials.
There are two types of hydrogen NMR that you need to be aware of: low-resolution and
high-resolution. Low-resolution proton NMR provides basic information about the number
of different types of protons (hydrogen environments) present in a molecule based on
the number of peaks in the spectrum and their relative numbers based on peak areas.
High-resolution proton NMR, on the other hand, provides more detailed information
by displaying the splitting of peaks due to neighbouring protons, giving insights into the
structural arrangement of the molecule. We will explore how to analyse all of these aspects
of NMR data.
Analysing hydrogen-1 NMR data
When analysing data from a hydrogen-1 NMR spectrum, there are three main features that
you need to look out for.
Chemical shift values
Similar to carbon-13 NMR, the number of peaks in a proton NMR spectrum corresponds
to the number of hydrogen environments (Table 11C–2). By analysing the chemical shift
values and comparing to tables of reference data, scientists can identify the nature of
the different hydrogen environments and get information about the overall structure of
the molecule.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
11C NUCLEAR MAGNETIC RESONANCE SPECTROSCOPY
439
Table 11C–2 Typical chemical shift values for hydrogen-1 NMR data relative to TMS = 0
Type of proton Chemical shift (ppm)
R–CH3 0.9–1.0
R–CH2–R 1.3–1.4
RCH=CH–CH3 1.6–1.9
R3–CH 1.5
CH3 C
O
OR
or
CH3 C O
NHR
2.0
R CH3
C
O
2.1–2.7
R–CH2–X (X = F, Cl, Br or I) 3.0–4.5
R–CH2–OH, R2–CH–OH 3.3–4.5
R C O
NHCH2R
3.2
R—O—CH3 or R—O—CH2R 3.3–3.7
O
O CH3
C 2.3
R C O
OCH2R
3.7–4.8
R–O–H 1–6
(varies considerably under different conditions)
R–NH2 1–5
RHC=CHR 4.5–7.0
OH 4.0–12.0
H 6.9–9.0
R C O
NHCH2R
8.1
R C O
H
9.4–10.0
R C
O
O
H
9.0–13.0
© VCAA 2020 Chemistry Examination Data Book
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
440 CHAPTER 11 INSTRUMENTAL ANALYSIS OF ORGANIC COMPOUNDS
We can see from the spectrum in Figure 11C–3 that we have three different environments
with chemical shift values at around 1.2, 2.6 and 3.6 ppm. From this, we can determine that
there are three unique hydrogen environments present in our unknown compound.
Chemical shift
(ppm)
Relative peak
area
1.23 3
2.61 1
3.69 2
11 10 9 8
7 6
5 4 3 2 1 0
ppm
Figure 11C–3 Proton NMR
of a compound with the
molecular formula C2H6O,
with chemical shift values
of 1.23, 2.61 and 3.69
Integration curve
the area
under a peak
that directly
correlates to
the number
of protons
producing that
particular signal
in the spectrum
Integration curves
The integration curve is a plot of the intensity of the NMR signal as a function of the
chemical shift. The integration curve provides information about the relative number
of hydrogen atoms that produce each signal in the NMR spectrum. The area under the
integration curve, measured in arbitrary units, is proportional to the number of hydrogen
atoms that produce each signal, and this information can be used to determine the relative
number of each type of hydrogen atom in the molecule. For example, if a peak has an
integration value of 2, it means that it contains twice as many hydrogen atoms as a peak
with an integration value of 1. By analysing the integration curve in conjunction with the
chemical shift values, scientists can identify the types of atoms present in the molecule and
determine its overall structure.
3
Chemical shift
(ppm)
Relative peak
area
1.23 3
2.61 1
3.69 2
2
1
11 10 9 8 7 6
5 4 3 2 1 0
ppm
Figure 11C–4 Proton NMR
of a compound with the
molecular formula C2H6O,
displaying integration
curves
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
11C NUCLEAR MAGNETIC RESONANCE SPECTROSCOPY
441
We can see from the information provided in Figure 11C–4 that our relative peak areas
are 3 : 1 : 2 for the environments at 1.23 ppm, 2.61 ppm and 3.69 ppm, respectively. From
this, we can determine that there are three times more hydrogen atoms in the environment
at 1.23 than the one at 2.61. Similarly, there are twice as many hydrogen atoms in the
environment at 3.69 than the one at 2.61. With this information and that gained from the
chemical shift data, we now know the number of hydrogen environments and the number
of hydrogen atoms in these environments. To be able to determine how they are arranged
though, we need to analyse the peak splitting.
Peak splitting
Proton NMR can produce either low or high resolution data. In high resolution proton
NMR, what might have appeared as a single peak on a low resolution spectrum is split
into a cluster of peaks. Peak splitting occurs when the signals from a set of equivalent
hydrogen atoms are split into multiple peaks due to the influence of neighbouring hydrogen
atoms. The resulting peaks in the NMR spectrum are called multiplets and can provide
important information about the molecular structure. The number of peaks in a multiplet
is determined by the number of hydrogen atoms on neighbouring carbon atoms and
follows the rule n + 1, where n is equal to the number of neighbouring hydrogen atoms.
For example, the signal from a proton that has three hydrogen atoms on the neighbouring
carbon atom (n = 3) will be split into a quartet (3 + 1 = 4). If there are two neighbouring
carbon atoms, n is equal to the total number of hydrogen atoms bonded to them. The
signal from hydrogen atoms not bonded to carbon atoms will not undergo peak splitting
(that is, will always be a singlet). For example, the signal from the hydrogen in a hydroxyl
group (–OH) will always be a singlet. The multiplets can provide important information
about the connectivity of the atoms in the molecule and can be used to help determine the
molecular structure.
Peak splitting
the division of
a signal into
several smaller
peaks due to
interactions with
adjacent nuclei
Multiplet
the resulting
peaks when peak
splitting occurs
in an NMR
spectrum, which
can provide
important
information
about molecular
structure
Triplet
Quartet
VIDEO 11C–1
UNDERSTANDING
FEATURES IN NMR
DATA
Singlet
11 10 9 8 7 6
5 4
3 2 1 0
ppm
Figure 11C–5 High-
resolution proton NMR
of a compound with the
molecular formula C2H6O
From this, we can see that we have a triplet, a singlet and a quartet present at 1.23 ppm,
2.61 ppm and 3.69 ppm respectively. This tells us about the number of hydrogen atoms in
the neighbouring environment.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
442 CHAPTER 11 INSTRUMENTAL ANALYSIS OF ORGANIC COMPOUNDS
H
H
CH
C
O
H
H
H
All of this information, combined with the provided molecular formula,
C2H6O, is consistent with the unknown compound being ethanol.
If we focus on the environment at 1.23 ppm, we now know the following
information.
• It has three hydrogen atoms in its environment (highlighted in yellow).
• The triplet tells us the neighbouring environment has two hydrogen atoms.
• The relative peak area indicates the neighbouring environment is the one at 3.69 ppm.
Moving onto the environment at 2.61 ppm, we now know the following information.
• It has one hydrogen atom in its environment (highlighted in blue).
• The singlet tells us there are no neighbouring hydrogen atoms.
Moving onto the environment at 3.69 ppm, we now know the following information.
• It has two hydrogen atoms in its environment (highlighted in pink).
• The quartet tells us the neighbouring environment has three hydrogen atoms.
• The relative peak area indicates the neighbouring environment is the one at 1.23 ppm.
Check-in questions – Set 1
WORKSHEET
11C–1
ANALYSING
NMR DATA
DOC
1 Given a hydrogen NMR spectrum with a peak that splits into a triplet, what can be
inferred about the hydrogen causing this signal?
2 What does the area under a peak or integration curve represent in hydrogen NMR?
3 If a carbon-13 NMR spectrum for a compound shows three distinct peaks and a
hydrogen-1 NMR spectrum for the same compound shows six distinct peaks, how many
unique carbon and hydrogen environments does this compound have?
WORKSHEET
11C–2 DATA
ANALYSIS USING
MULTIPLE
INSTRUMENTAL
ANALYSIS
TECHNIQUES
DOC
NMR for identification of compounds
NMR spectroscopy can be used to give an indication on the identification of samples. As
seen throughout this section, NMR can provide an array of data on organic compounds.
This includes chemical shifts indicating the number of carbon or hydrogen environments,
integration curves illustrating the numbers of carbon or hydrogen atoms in these
environments and peak splitting providing evidence for the number of hydrogen atoms
on neighbouring carbon atoms. Using all of this information, often in combination with
a known molecular formula, can aid in the determination of the structure of the analysed
compound. In this way, NMR can help provide the identity of compounds in samples.
Analysing data from multiple sources
Across the first three sections of this chapter, it has become clear that instrumental
analysis can provide valuable information about organic compounds. While each individual
technique gives useful insights into the samples they are analysing, often the most value
is gained when data from the different instruments are combined. In fact, it is a common
exam question to be provided with spectra from MS, IR and NMR and asked to determine
the structure and identity of the unknown compound.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
11C NUCLEAR MAGNETIC RESONANCE SPECTROSCOPY
443
11C SKILLS
Analysing NMR spectra
When analysing NMR
spectra, care needs to be
taken with chemical shift
values on the x-axis. The
scale on the x-axis goes
the opposite way to what
you might expect, with
the smallest chemical shift
values found on the right-
hand side and the largest
chemical shift values found
on the left-hand side. This
is true for both 13C and 1H
NMR spectra.
200 180 160 140 120 100
ppm
80 60 40 20 0
Increasing chemical shift
Section 11C questions
1 Compare the following techniques:
a carbon-13 NMR and low-resolution proton NMR
b low-resolution proton NMR and high resolution proton NMR.
2 When analysing NMR data, one of the things that you might look at is the integration
curve information.
a What information does the integration curve in a proton NMR spectrum provide?
b In a compound with the formula C3H8O, if the integration curve shows a ratio
of 6 : 1 : 1, what could be the possible structure of this compound?
c Another compound that has the molecular formula C3H8O is an ether with the semi-
structural formula of CH3CH2OCH3. What would be the integration curve for this
compound?
3 Another feature that can be analysed in NMR data is peak splitting.
a Is peak splitting associated with low resolution or high resolution proton NMR?
b What information does peak splitting provide about the structure of a molecule?
c Draw the structure for butan-1-ol, CH3CH2CH2OH, and label each different
hydrogen environment and indicate what the peak splitting would be for that
environment.
4 You have a sample that contains an unknown compound. You know that it's either
acetone (CH3COCH3) or ethanol (CH3CH2OH). You run a carbon-13 NMR test and
find two distinct peaks: one at around 20 ppm and another at around 170 ppm. Based
on these data and the information in Table 11C–1, which compound is likely in your
sample? Justify your answer.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
444 CHAPTER 11 INSTRUMENTAL ANALYSIS OF ORGANIC COMPOUNDS
11D
Chromatography
Study Design:
•
the principles of chromatography, including
high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC)
and the use of retention times and the construction
of a calibration curve to determine the concentration
of an organic compound in a solution (excluding
features of instrumentation and operation)
Glossary:
Mobile phase
Retention time
Stationary phase
ENGAGE
Blood tests – studying won’t help, but chromatography will
One of the most common tests that a doctor may order when a patient has symptoms
of an illness is a blood test. Performing a blood test allows the doctor to get results
that indicate whether there is something abnormal present in the patient’s blood or
whether some of the levels of normal compounds are not in their usual range. However,
while blood may be relatively simple to obtain as a sample, it is quite complex in its
composition. In fact, a study that looked at all of the proteins present in the blood
identified around 3700 different proteins! Therefore, in order to analyse a blood sample,
the pathologists need a way of first simplifying and separating this complex mixture.
They do this using a technique known as chromatography. In this section, you will
learn about the principles of chromatography, including a specific form called high-
performance liquid chromatography or HPLC, and then proceed to learn about how
chromatography data can be analysed.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
11D CHROMATOGRAPHY
445
EXPLAIN
What is chromatography?
In Unit 1, you started to learn about chromatography. In particular, the technique of
thin-layer chromatography (TLC) was discussed. As a reminder, chromatography is a
general term that is used to describe a number of different techniques that are responsible
for separating compounds in a mixture. Chromatography can be helpful for assessing both
the purity and identification of organic compounds. Chromatography is widely used in
many fields, including pharmaceuticals, food science and environmental science to analyse
complex mixtures and determine the composition and purity of individual components. In
this section, we will specifically discuss high-performance liquid chromatography or HPLC.
High-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC)
High-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) is a powerful analytical technique used
to separate, identify and quantify the components of complex mixtures. The basic principle
of HPLC is that the separation of different components of a sample is based on their
interactions with a stationary phase and a mobile phase. The stationary phase is typically a
solid material or a liquid immobilised on a solid support, while the mobile phase is a liquid
that flows through the stationary phase. The interaction between the components of the
sample and the stationary phase is controlled by the chemical and physical properties of
both the sample and the stationary phase, as well as the conditions of the mobile phase.
In HPLC, the sample is injected into a column containing the stationary phase. As the mobile
phase flows through the column, the different components of the sample interact with the
stationary phase to varying degrees, causing them to separate from each other. The more
strongly a component interacts with the stationary phase, the longer it takes to elute from the
column. The time at which a component elutes from the column is known as the retention
time, Rt. As the components elute from the column, they are detected by a detector, such
as an ultraviolet–visible (UV–visible) spectrophotometer, which produces a signal that is
proportional to the concentration of the component.
LINK UNIT 1
Stationary phase
a solid, liquid or
gel that remains
static during a
chromatography
experiment
Mobile phase
the liquid
or gas that
flows during a
chromatography
experiment,
which transports
the compounds
to be separated
at different
rates over the
stationary phase
Absorbance (AU)
Compound A
(Rt = 0.5 mins)
Compound B
(Rt = 0.68 mins)
Compound C
(Rt = 1.02 mins) Compound D
(Rt = 1.61 mins) Compound E
(Rt = 2.37 mins)
Retention time
the time taken
from when
the sample is
added to the
column to when
it is eluted;
symbol Rt
Compound F
(Rt = 2.55 mins)
VIDEO 11D–1
UNDERSTANDING
HPLC
CHROMATOGRAMS
0
0.5
1.0
1.5
Time (mins)
2.0
2.5
3.0
Figure 11D–1 This chromatogram shows peaks representing compounds that are detected when they
elute from the HPLC. The time taken to elute from the column is called the retention time (Rt).
We can explore this further by imagining an HPLC column that contains a polar stationary
phase and a non-polar mobile phase. When a polar stationary phase (for example, silica)
and a non-polar mobile phase (for example, hexane) are used in HPLC, the separation of
components in a sample is based on their relative polarities. Polar compounds will have a
stronger interaction with the polar stationary phase and therefore will elute more slowly
from the column compared to non-polar compounds, which will interact more with the
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
446 CHAPTER 11 INSTRUMENTAL ANALYSIS OF ORGANIC COMPOUNDS
WORKSHEET
11D–1
ANALYSING
HPLC DATA
DOC
non-polar mobile phase and elute faster. At the beginning of the separation, the non-polar
compounds in the sample will be carried quickly by the non-polar mobile phase, while the
polar compounds will be more strongly retained by the polar stationary phase, causing
them to elute more slowly. As the separation proceeds, the non-polar compounds will be
eluted first, followed by the less polar compounds, and finally the more polar compounds.
As mentioned earlier, the detection of the separated compounds would then be achieved by
the use of UV–visible spectroscopy. The resulting chromatogram will show a series of peaks
representing the different components of the sample, with the retention time of each peak
indicating its relative polarity. We can apply this analysis to the chromatogram represented
in Figure 11D–1 (on the previous page). Assuming that this sample was run on the same
column as just described, we can make the following conclusions:
• Compound A has the shortest retention time and so is the most non-polar or least polar
compound. It will have interacted the least with the stationary phase.
• Compound F has the longest retention time and so is the most polar or least non-polar
compound. It will have interacted the most with the stationary phase.
VIDEO
WORKED
EXAMPLE 11D–1
Worked example 11D–1: Determining relative polarity from HPLC data
An HPLC column containing a polar silica matrix is used to separate a mixture
containing three compounds, designated compounds A, B and C. Hexane is used as
the non-polar mobile phase. The retention times for the compounds are 3.25 minutes
(Compound B), 4.15 minutes (Compound A) and 9.79 minutes (Compound C).
Determine the relative polarities of the three compounds.
Solution
Logic Process
Step 1 Extract the information about
the properties of the stationary
phase and mobile phase from
the question.
Stationary phase = polar
Mobile phase = non-polar
Step 2 Determine the order that the
compounds eluted in the HPLC.
The compound with the shortest retention
time will have eluted first, whereas the
longest retention time will have eluted last.
1st = Compound B (3.25 mins)
2nd = Compound A (4.15 mins)
3rd = Compound C (9.79 mins)
Step 3 Use the information in Steps 1
and 2 to determine the relative
polarities of the compounds.
The most polar compound will interact with
the stationary phase the most and so take
the longest to elute. The most non-polar
compound will interact with the mobile phase
the most and be eluted first.
Order in increasing polarity: B < A < C
Check-in questions – Set 1
1 What is the basic principle behind high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC)?
2 What does the term ‘retention time’ mean in HPLC?
3 If two compounds, A and B, are separated by HPLC with a polar stationary phase and
compound A has a longer retention time than compound B, what can be inferred about
the properties of these two compounds?
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
11D CHROMATOGRAPHY
447
Calibration curves and calculating unknown concentrations
To accurately quantify a specific compound, it is essential to construct a calibration
curve that relates the concentration of the compound to the measured response of
the instrument, such as absorbance. A calibration curve is a plot of the instrument
response against the concentration of a series of known standards, which allows for the
determination of the unknown concentration of the compound in the sample.
To construct a calibration curve using HPLC, a series of solutions with known
concentrations of the compound of interest are prepared. These solutions are typically
prepared by diluting a stock solution of the compound. The concentration range of the
standards should cover the expected range of the unknown samples.
The prepared standards are then injected into the HPLC instrument, and the peak area
or height of the compound of interest is measured. This is then plotted against the known
concentration of the standards to construct a calibration curve.
After the calibration curve has been constructed, it can be used to determine the
concentration of an unknown sample. To do this, you would first conduct the same
measurement for the unknown sample as was done for the known standards, which is
typically the peak area or height.
To calculate the concentration of the unknown sample, you would first plot the instrument
response on the calibration curve to determine the corresponding concentration of the
compound. This can be done by drawing a vertical line from the instrument response value,
on the x-axis of the graph, to the calibration curve. From this point on the calibration curve,
you can then draw a horizontal line to the y-axis to determine the concentration of the
compound in the unknown sample. It is important to ensure that the calibration curve is
linear within the range of concentrations used to prepare the standards, to ensure accurate
quantification of the unknown sample.
3000000
2500000
2000000
Peak area
DOC
1500000
WORKSHEET
11D–2 USING
CALIBRATION
CURVES TO
CALCULATE
SAMPLE
CONCENTRATIONS
1000000
500000
0
0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20
Sample concentrations (mg L–1)
Figure 11D–2 A calibration curve uses standards with known concentration to determine a
relationship between concentration and peak area in HPLC.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
448 CHAPTER 11 INSTRUMENTAL ANALYSIS OF ORGANIC COMPOUNDS
Worked example 11D–2: Determining unknown concentration of a sample using a
calibration curve
Scientists want to measure the quantity of caffeine in a new energy drink, for which the
label on a 250 mL can says contains 90 mg. To do this, they run six standards containing
VIDEO
WORKED
EXAMPLE 11D–2
known concentrations of caffeine, ranging from 0 to 100 mg, and measure the peak area
obtained on the chromatogram. Three samples of the energy drink are then also run and the peak areas
calculated. The results are found in the table below. From these results, construct a calibration curve and
determine if the label on the can is accurate.
Sample
(mg L–1)
0.000 100.0 200.0 300.0 400.0 500.0 Energy
drink #1
Energy
drink #2
Energy
drink #3
Peak
area
0 1999 3978 6005 7986 10 022 7212 7198 7208
Solution
Peak area
12000
10000
8000
6000
4000
2000
0
0
100 200 300 362 400 500 600
Concentration of caffeine (mg L–1)
Logic Process
Step 1 Draw and label your axes for your calibration curve
placing peak area on the y-axis and concentration
on the x-axis.
x-axis = Concentration of caffeine (mg L–1)
y-axis = Peak area
Step 2 Place your data points on the graph. Shown by the blue circles
Step 3 Draw a line of best fit for the data points to generate
your calibration curve.
Shown by the dotted red line
Step 4 Calculate the average peak area for your energy
drink samples.
Average peak area (energy drink samples)
7212 + 7198 + 7208
=
3 = 7206
Step 5 Draw a line from the position on the y-axis of your
calculated value in Step 4 to the calibration curve.
Shown by green horizontal dotted line
Step 6 Draw a line from the position on the calibration
curve from Step 5 down to the x-axis and record
the concentration value obtained.
Shown by green vertical dotted line
Step 7 Perform unit conversions to determine if the value
on the can is accurate.
Concentration of caffeine in energy drink
samples = 362.0 mg L–1
Therefore, a 250 mL can contains 90.50 mg
of caffeine. This means the label is accurate.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
11D CHROMATOGRAPHY
449
HPLC for identification and purity
As with the other analytical techniques described in this chapter, HPLC can also be used to
gain an understanding of the purity and composition of a sample. The analysis of both these
characteristics involves the use of the chromatogram, specifically through the use of the
detected peaks and their retention times.
Identification
HPLC can be used to give an indication regarding the identity of components within a sample.
The easiest way to do this is to compare the retention times of the observed peaks in the sample
with those of known standards. If a particular compound is run through the same HPLC
column under the same conditions, it will always have the same retention time. Importantly
though, if the conditions are changed (such as a change in solvent for the mobile phase or
temperature that the separation is conducted at), then the retention time will also change.
As an example, you may want to check whether there is vitamin C present in a new liquid
multivitamin. To do this using HPLC, you would first run a sample of pure vitamin C
through the column and measure its retention time. Following that, you would then run
the multivitamin sample through the same column under the same conditions. If a peak
was observed at the same retention time on both chromatograms, this would suggest that
vitamin C is present in the multivitamin. However, it is important to note that this process
only provides an indication as to the identity of the compound; it is not definitive. Multiple
compounds can have the same retention time and so other techniques should be used to
determine a conclusive identity.
Purity
Whereas the retention time is important for determining the identity of the components
of a sample, the number of peaks is more relevant when analysing the purity. If a sample
is expected to contain only one component, then it would be considered pure if only one
peak was observed (at the correct retention time). Samples containing more than one
compound can also be assessed for their purity using HPLC. In these instances, a pure
sample would only have peaks corresponding to the expected components detected on
the chromatogram. Additional peaks or peaks appearing at unexpected retention times
would be indicative of impurities or the presence of contaminants within the sample. As
mentioned in this section, a UV–visible spectrophotometer is often used as the detection
method in HPLC. One limitation of this is that any impurities that don’t absorb in this
region of the electromagnetic spectrum won’t be detected.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
450 CHAPTER 11 INSTRUMENTAL ANALYSIS OF ORGANIC COMPOUNDS
VIDEO 11D–2
SKILLS:
USING KEY
TERMINOLOGY
11D SKILLS
Using key terminology
When describing the separation of certain compounds or components of substances
using HPLC, it is important to use precise key terminology and not oversimplify your
language.
Take the following question as an example.
Question:
Explain the difference between compounds A and B, which have been separated by
HPLC with a non-polar stationary phase and water as the solvent. The chromatogram is
shown below.
Compound A
(Rt = 0.5 min)
Absorbance (AU)
Compound B
(Rt = 1.61 min)
0
0.5
1.0
1.5
Time (min)
2.0
2.5
3.0
Initial answer:
The two compounds separate during HPLC and are eluted at different times, with
sample B having a longer time.
Comments:
While this is not wrong, the language used is not specific enough for the level expected
in VCE. Before providing a more detailed answer to this question, it might be good to
first list all the key terms that should be included in your answer.
HPLC Polar Non-polar
Mobile phase Stationary phase Retention time
Adsorption Desorption
When it comes to writing your answer, you can use dot points if it is easier to keep it
succinct, while still including the key terms that you identified.
Complete answer:
• Compounds A and B were separated using HPLC.
• The stationary phase of the HPLC was non-polar and the mobile phase, water,
was polar.
• Compounds that are less polar (or more non-polar) experience more adsorption to
the stationary phase and consequently take longer to elute. This can be seen with
compound A.
• Compounds that are more polar tend to experience desorption from the stationary
phase and interact more with the mobile phase. This can be seen with compound B.
• As such, compound B will have a longer retention time compared to compound A.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
11D CHROMATOGRAPHY
451
Section 11D questions
1 Describe how the HPLC chromatogram can be used to help determine the identity of
a compound in a sample.
2 Describe how the HPLC chromatogram can be used to help qualitatively determine
the purity of a sample.
3 A reverse-phase HPLC column uses a non-polar stationary phase and a polar mobile phase.
a Define ‘stationary phase’ and ‘mobile phase’.
b Describe how a mixture containing pentane, pentan-2-ol and pentanoic acid would
separate in a reverse-phase HPLC column.
c Define ‘retention time’.
d Place the three compounds listed in part b in the order that you would expect them
to elute from the reverse-phase HPLC column, going from the lowest retention time
to the highest.
4 You are hired to conduct an analysis of a commercial multivitamin.
a To begin, you run a sample of pure vitamin D through a specific HPLC column and
a peak is observed at a retention time of 4.6 minutes. A sample from the commercial
multivitamin is run through the same column and a peak is observed
at 4.6 minutes. Can you conclude that the commercial multivitamin contains
vitamin D? Why or why not?
b You want to run another sample of the commercial multivitamin to provide replicate
data. However, someone else is using the HPLC column that you used initially.
Being impatient, you decide to use a different column that is available and ready
to go. The specific stationary phase and mobile phase used for this column are
different from the previous one, but still one is polar and the other non-polar. No
peak is observed at 4.6 minutes; however, you observe a peak at a retention time of
4.9 minutes. What can you conclude from this?
c If you wanted to do further analysis on your result from part b, what would be a good
additional experiment to run?
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
452
Chapter 11 review
Summary
Create your own set of summary notes for this chapter, on paper or in a digital document. A model
summary is provided in the Teacher Resources and can be used to compare with yours.
Checklist
In the Interactive Textbook, the success criteria are linked from the review questions and will be
automatically ticked when answers are correct. Alternatively, print or photocopy this page and tick
the boxes when you have answered the corresponding questions correctly.
Success criteria – I am now able to: Linked questions
11A.1 Describe the principle of mass spectrometry (MS) 11A.2 Define ‘base peak’ 5☐
11A.3 Define ‘molecular ion peak’ 11A.4 Identify the base peak and molecular ion peak from a given
1☐
13☐
12☐
mass spectrum
11A.5 State that the molecular ion peak corresponds to the molecular
13☐
mass of the compound
11A.6 Determine the ions that correspond to fragments in a given
13☐
mass spectrum
11A.7 Determine the identity of a compound from given mass
12☐
spectrometry data
11B.1 Describe the principle of infrared (IR) spectroscopy 11B.2 Identify bond types present in a sample from given infrared
7☐
2☐, 12☐
spectroscopy data
11B.3 Determine the identity of organic compounds from provided
12☐
options using given infrared spectroscopy data
11C.1 Describe the principle of nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR)
8☐
spectroscopy
11C.2 Determine the structure of an organic compound from given
9☐
carbon-13 NMR data
11C.3 Determine the structure of an organic compound from given
3☐, 6☐
proton NMR data
11C.4 Determine the structure of organic compounds using a
12☐
combination of given MS, IR and NMR data
11D.1 Describe the principle of high-performance liquid
4☐
chromatography (HPLC)
11D.2 Describe the qualitative purity of a substance from given
11☐
HPLC data
11D.3 Describe how retention times from HPLC data can be used to
10☐
help in the identification of organic compounds
11D.4 11D.5 Construct a calibration curve from given HPLC data Calculate the concentration of an organic compound from a
11☐
11☐
given calibration curve and HPLC data
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
453
Multiple-choice questions
1 In a mass spectrum, the x-axis shows the mass-to-charge ratio (m/z). What does the
mass-to-charge ratio represent?
A the number of isotopes
B the abundance of each isotope
C the mass of the species divided by its net charge
D the net charge of the species divided by its mass
2 Which of the following families of organic compounds shows a strong absorption in the
infrared region around 1700 cm–1 due to a C=O stretch?
A alkanes
B alkenes
C alkynes
D carboxylic acids
3 A compound shows a triplet signal in its 1H NMR spectrum. What does this indicate about the
protons causing this signal?
A They are in an aromatic ring.
B They are part of a triple bond.
C They are adjacent to two other protons.
D They are adjacent to three other protons.
4 In an HPLC set-up, the mobile phase is
A the sample to be separated.
B the liquid that carries the sample.
C the detector that captures the data.
D the stationary phase soaked in liquid.
5 What does the base peak represent in a mass spectrum?
A the most abundant ion
B the least abundant ion
C the ion with the lowest mass-to-charge ratio
D the ion with the highest mass-to-charge ratio
6 What does the integration (area under the peak) in a 1H NMR spectrum represent?
A the charge on the protons
B the chemical shift of the protons
C the splitting pattern of the protons
D the relative number of protons that give rise to the peak
7 Infrared spectroscopy is often used to identify
A isotopes.
B atomic number.
C functional groups.
D molecular weight.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
454
8 The signal at 0 ppm in a 13C NMR spectrum is
A an impurity.
B the solvent peak.
C a carbon–carbon double bond.
D the standard reference, often tetramethylsilane (TMS).
9 In a 13C NMR spectrum, what does the chemical shift of a peak indicate?
A the number of carbon atoms
B the charge on the carbon atom
C the chemical environment of the carbon atom
D the number of bonds the carbon atom is making
10 An HPLC experiment is performed to separate a sample that contains ethane, ethanol and
ethanoic acid. The HPLC column uses a silica stationary phase, which is polar, and hexane
as the mobile phase, which is non-polar. Which answer below correctly predicts the order of
elution from the HPLC column, going from shortest to longest retention time?
A ethanoic acid, ethanol, ethane
B ethane, ethanol, ethanoic acid
C ethanol, ethane, ethanoic acid
D ethane, ethanoic acid, ethanol
Short-answer questions
11 Phenol is an organic compound used in the production of plastic materials. There is a
concern that a creek near a plastic manufacturer is contaminated with phenol, so an analytical
chemistry laboratory is contracted to analyse samples of the creek water. The chemistry
laboratory prepares standard solutions of phenol and analyses them using HPLC. The phenol
standards produce a chromatogram with a single peak at a retention time of 2.78 minutes. The
peak area for each of the standard solutions are shown in the table below.
Concentration of phenol standard (g L–1) Peak area
0.100 103
0.200 198
0.300 304
0.400 410
0.500 497
a Use the data in the table to prepare a calibration curve.  (3 marks)
Three samples of the creek water are prepared for HPLC by mixing 1.00 mL of creek
water with 9.00 mL of distilled water. These diluted creek water samples are run on the
HPLC under the same conditions as the standard solutions. The area under the peak with
a retention time of 2.78 minutes on the chromatograms for the three creek water samples
were 176, 182 and 179.
b The standard solutions result in chromatograms with just a single peak. However,
the chromatograms from the creek water samples had multiple peaks. Suggest
why this would be the case.  (1 mark)
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
455
c Calculate the average peak area from the three creek water samples.  (1 mark)
d Use the calibration curve to determine the concentration of phenol in the undiluted
creek water samples.  (2 marks)
12 An organic compound was known to have an empirical formula of C4H8O. It was analysed by
various instruments to get information about its structure.
The mass spectrum of the compound is shown below.
100
80
Relative intensity
60
40
20
0
10 15
20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60 65 70 75
m/z
a What is the m/z of the molecular ion peak?  (1 mark)
b Use this molecular ion peak to determine the molecular formula of the compound. (1 mark)
The infrared spectrum of the compound is shown below.
100
Transmittance (%)
50
0
4000 3000 2500 2000 1500 1000 500
Wavenumber (cm–1)
c What evidence is there from the infrared spectrum that the compound
contains a C=O bond?  (1 mark)
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
456
d What evidence is there from the infrared spectrum that the compound does not
contain an O–H bond?  The 13C NMR spectrum is shown below.
(1 mark)
220 200
180 160 140 120 100
80 60 40 20 0
ppm
e How many different carbon environments are present in the molecule?  f What type of carbon environment produces the peak at 209 ppm?  The 1H NMR spectrum is shown below.
(1 mark)
(1 mark)
Integral 2 3 3
11 10 9 8 7 6
5
4 3 2 1 0
ppm
g How many different hydrogen environments are present in the molecule?  (1 mark)
h The peak at 2.5 ppm is a quartet. What does that tell you about the number of
hydrogen atoms on neighbouring carbon atoms?  (1 mark)
i Using information from all four spectra, give the structural formula of the
compound.  (1 mark)
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
457
13 A compound with the molecular formula C3H7Br was analysed by mass spectrometry.
Bromine has two stable isotopes: 79Br with a natural abundance of 51% and 81Br with
a natural abundance of 49%. The mass spectrum of the compound is shown below.
100
80
Relative intensity
60
40
20
0
0 25 50
75 100 125
m/z
a What is a molecular ion peak and what information does it tell you about
the compound?  (2 marks)
b The mass spectrum of this compound shows two molecular ion peaks at 122 and
124 m/z. Explain why there are two molecular ion peaks and give the molecular
formula of the ion that produced the peak at 124 m/z.  c Give the likely structure of the ion that produced the base peak at 43 m/z. (2 marks)
(1 mark)
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
458
UNIT
4
HOW ARE CARBON-BASED COMPOUNDS DESIGNED
FOR PURPOSE?
CHAPTER
12
MEDICINAL CHEMISTRY
Introduction
Bioprospecting is the search for useful compounds, particularly for medicinal
purposes, in nature. Although this has gained a lot of momentum in more recent
years, it is not a new concept. Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander communities
are well known for having utilised local plants for the treatment of many ailments.
As an example, communities along the coast of eastern Australia used the paste
generated from crushed tea tree (Melaleuca) leaves for applying to wounds. It was
later shown through experimentation that tea tree leaves have very strong antiseptic
properties, which explains why it is effective in helping to prevent infections on wounds. In this
chapter, you will learn more about the process of extracting medicinal compounds from plants, the
aspects of their chemical structures that make them effective and how enzymes, a specific class of
organic compounds, can also be targeted for therapeutic purposes.
INTRODUCTION
VIDEO
MEDICINAL
CHEMISTRY
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
459
Curriculum
Area of Study 2 Outcome 2
How are organic compounds analysed and used?
Study Design: Learning intentions – at the end of the
chapter I will be able to:
•
•
•
Extraction and purification of natural
plant compounds as possible active
ingredients for medicines, using solvent
extraction and distillation
Identification of the structure and
functional groups of organic molecules
that are medicines
Significance of isomers and the
identification of chiral centres (carbon
atom surrounded by four different
groups) in the effectiveness of
medicines
12A 12A.1 12A.2 12A.3 12A.4 12A.5 12A.6 12A.7 12A.8  Organic compounds as medicines
 Recall that natural plant compounds
can contain active ingredients used for
medicinal purposes
 Describe how solvent extraction can be
used to extract and purify natural plant
compounds for medicinal purposes
 Describe how distillation can be used
to extract and purify natural plant
compounds for medicinal purposes
 Recall some common classes of organic
medicines and the key functional groups
that characterise each class
 Explain why understanding how functional
groups contribute to the mechanism of
action of medicines will help guide future
drug development
 Define ‘chiral centre’ and identify
compounds that contain a chiral centre
 Describe how chiral centres can result in
isomers and enantiomers
 Explain why the presence of isomers
in compounds used as medicines can
cause problems
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
460
Study Design: Learning intentions – at the end of the
chapter I will be able to:
•
•
Enzymes as protein-based catalysts
in living systems: primary, secondary,
tertiary and quaternary structures and
changes in enzyme function in terms
of structure and bonding as a result of
increased temperature (denaturation),
decreased temperature (lowered
activity) or changes in pH (formation of
zwitterions and denaturation)
Medicines that function as competitive
enzyme inhibitors: organic molecules
that bind through lock-and-key
mechanism to an active site preventing
binding of the actual substrate
12B  Enzymes
12B.1  Define the primary, secondary, tertiary and
quaternary structures of proteins
12B.2  Describe the interactions and bonding that
are important for the primary, secondary,
tertiary and quaternary levels of protein
structure to form
12B.3  Recall that the function of an enzyme
involves the binding of a substrate to its
active site
12B.4  Describe the lock-and-key model of
enzyme function
12B.5  Explain the effect of temperature changes,
including denaturation, on the rate of
enzyme activity
12B.6  Explain the effect of changes in pH on the
rate of enzyme activity
12B.7  Define ‘zwitterion’ and explain how this
forms in relation to amino acids
12B.8  Explain the effect of a competitive inhibitor
on the rate of enzyme activity
12B.9  Describe how competitive inhibition can be
used as a treatment approach
VCE Chemistry Study Design extracts © VCAA; reproduced by permission.
Glossary
Achiral
Active site
Chiral
Chiral centre
Competitive inhibition
Denatured
Enantiomer
Monomer
Peptide bond
Pharmacology
Polymer
Polypeptide
Solvent extraction
Substrate
Zwitterion
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
461﻿ CONCEPT MAP
Concept map
HO
CH2OH
C O
OH HO
12A Organic compounds as medicines
Developing medicine using
compounds found in nature and
identifying key functional groups
that make medicine effective
CH2OH
O
CH2OH
H
C O C O
C
HO
O
O
O
Cortisol
Corticosterone
Aldosterone
12B Enzymes
Biological catalysts that speed up
chemical reactions and can be used
as therapeutic targets
Normal enzyme reaction
Products
Substrate
Enzyme Enzyme
Enzyme–substrate complex
Competitive inhibition
Inhibitor
Enzyme Substrate Enzyme–inhibitor
complex
STOP
Inhibitor binds to active site,
preventing the substrate from
binding
See the Interactive Textbook for an interactive version of this concept map
interlinked with all concept maps for the course.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
462 CHAPTER 12 MEDICINAL CHEMISTRY
Organic compounds as medicines
12A
Study Design:
•
Extraction and purification of natural plant compounds
as possible active ingredients for medicines, using
solvent extraction and distillation
•
Identification of the structure and functional groups of
organic molecules that are medicines
•
Significance of isomers and the identification of chiral
centres (carbon atom surrounded by four different
groups) in the effectiveness of medicines
Glossary:
Achiral
Chiral
Chiral centre
Enantiomer
Pharmacology
Solvent extraction
ENGAGE
Mummy’s medicine
The image shown here is
of Ebers Papyrus, which
is an ancient text from
around 1550 BCE. Written
in hieroglyphics, it is one of
the oldest medical scrolls
from ancient Egypt and
highlights many of the
natural healing approaches
that they believed worked
at the time. As an example,
the papyrus has information
suggesting that a person
suffering from asthma should
be treated by inhaling the
vapour produced by heating
a mixture of herbs on a
brick. The text also describes
a potential treatment for
diabetes, which involves
drinking a concoction of
plant fibres, beer, cucumber
flowers, elderberry and green
dates. Although some of
these medicinal approaches
may not be used today, Ebers
Figure 12A–1 The Ebers Papyrus is an ancient Egyptian
medical scroll from around 1550 BCE written in
hieroglyphics.
Papyrus does provide a clear
indication that humans were using compounds from nature as medicine even 3500 years
ago. In this section, you will be exploring chemistry techniques that can be employed
to extract and purify compounds from nature to be used as medicines. As well as this,
you will also be learning about important properties of organic compounds that can
determine their effectiveness as medicine.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
12A ORGANIC COMPOUNDS AS MEDICINES
463
EXPLAIN
Medicine from nature
In Australia, Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples have been using plant
compounds for thousands of years to treat a variety of medical conditions. One example
of this is the use of the Pittosporum angustifolium, or gumby gumby plant as it is more
commonly known (Figure 12A–2), which is found all across mainland Australia.
NOTE
P. angustifolium is a medium-sized tree growing to approximately 10 m high, with yellow flowers
and fragrant orange fruit in the winter and spring months. It most commonly grows in dry sandy
inland areas, such as mallee country.
Figure 12A–2 The leaves, flowers, bark and fruit from Pittosporum angustifolium, or gumby gumby
plant, have been used as medicine by Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples for a very long time.
While uses varied for different groups, a common traditional use involved the leaves
being infused in hot water to provide treatment against colds and coughs. As well as this,
the orange-coloured fruit has been mashed into a pulp and used as a balm to help treat
muscle cramps and skin conditions like eczema. These traditional approaches, which
have been claimed to be effective, have not yet been approved by the Therapeutic Goods
Administration (TGA) for therapeutic use in humans; however, research into their
potential is ongoing. These approaches are now being combined with modern chemistry
to see if other methods can help extract highly purified versions of the active compounds.
One of the techniques being assessed is solvent extraction.
Solvent extraction is a process used to separate compounds from mixtures by dissolving the
desired compound in a solvent. This technique is commonly used in the purification of
natural plant compounds for medicinal purposes. Plants contain a variety of compounds,
such as alkaloids, flavonoids and terpenoids, that have medicinal properties.
Solvent
extraction
a process used
to separate
compounds
from mixtures
by dissolving
the desired
compounds in
a solvent, often
with additional
heating or
agitation
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
464 CHAPTER 12 MEDICINAL CHEMISTRY
Table 12A–1 Examples of bioactive compounds present in Pittosporum angustifolium (gumby gumby)
Type of
bioactive
compound
Part of plant
compound can
be sourced from
Feature of
compound
Ailments that
are treated by
P. angustifolium
Examples of this type
of compound from
other plants
Alkaloids Leaves
Nitrogen-
containing
compounds
Colds, coughs
and cramps
Bark
Morphine, which is
a pain-relieving drug
(analgesic) found in
opium poppies
Quinine, which is
used to treat malaria
and is found in bark
of the cinchona tree
Flavonoids Fruit
(and leaves)
Non nitrogen-
containing
pigments
(15-carbon
backbone
consisting of two
phenyl rings and
a heterocyclic
ring)
Eczema and
muscle aches
Anthocyanins, which
make up the red, blue
or purple pigments
in red cabbage. (You
may have made a pH
indicator with this.)
Terpenoids Leaves and
seeds
Five-carbon
isoprene chains
with additional
oxygen-
containing
functional
groups
Tumours, fungal
infections and
HIV
Limonene found in
the rind of citrus fruit
Cannabinoids found
in cannabis
11D
CHROMATOGRAPHY LINK
However, extracting these compounds from the plant material can be challenging due to
the presence of unwanted materials or impurities. The steps involved in solvent extraction
are listed below.
1 The initial sample of plant material is dried and ground in a mortar and pestle, and is
then extracted with a polar solvent (for example, water, ethanol, methanol), including
additional heating and agitation to help the dissolving process.
Note: the appropriate solvent is chosen based on its selectivity towards the desired
solute(s) rather than undesired compounds.
2 The solvent containing the dissolved plant compounds is passed through filter paper
and then the solvent is removed under vacuum to give a crude extract. This is then
redissolved in a mixture of de-ionised water and an organic solvent that is immiscible
with water, and these liquid layers are separated in a separating funnel.
3 The denser aqueous phase can then be run off from the bottom of the separating funnel,
leaving the organic layer in the funnel.
4 The solvent can be removed by evaporation and the residue further purified by
techniques such as high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC). Alternatively,
distillation can be used to purify the compound of interest if it is a liquid.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
12A ORGANIC COMPOUNDS AS MEDICINES
465
As you learned in Section 10B, simple distillation is a method used to separate solutes
from solvents based on their different boiling points, and subsequently to purify different
chemicals. Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples used this technique to place wet,
ground plant matter over a controlled fire and the subsequent vapours were used to treat
fever. The steps involved in the distillation process are as follows.
1 Begin circulating water in the condenser.
2 Using a water or oil bath for even heat distribution, begin heating the flask containing
the solute(s) and solvent until the solution starts to boil. The substance with the lower
boiling point will vaporise (turn into a gas) first and then travel up the cylinder and
through the condenser.
3 In the condenser, this gas cools and turns back into the liquid state, where it is collected
in a separate container as distillate.
LINK
10B ANALYSIS
OF PURITY AND
CONCENTRATION
Thermometer
Cooling
water out
Cooling
water in
Condenser
Round bottom flask
Oil bath
Hotplate
Distillate
Figure 12A–3 The general set-up of a simple distillation experiment
Common structures and functional groups in medicines
Organic compounds are widely used as medicines due to their unique structures and
functional groups that allow them to interact with biological systems in specific ways. The
structure of organic compounds plays an important role in determining their properties
and effects on the body.
As discussed in Sections 8C and 8D, the basic structure of organic compounds consists of
a carbon backbone, which can be straight, branched, cyclic or aromatic, and with various
functional groups attached to it. Functional groups are specific arrangements of atoms
that give organic compounds their unique chemical properties. Examples include hydroxyl
(–OH), carboxyl (–COOH), amino (–NH2) and methyl (–CH3) groups, among others.
These functional groups play an important role in determining the biological activity of the
organic compound.
LINK
LINK
8C FUNCTIONAL
GROUPS:
HALOALKANES,
AMINES AND
ALCOHOLS
8D FUNCTIONAL
GROUPS:
ALDEHYDES,
KETONES,
CARBOXYLIC
ACIDS AND
ESTERS
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
466 CHAPTER 12 MEDICINAL CHEMISTRY
Medicinal organic compounds can be categorised into several classes based on their
biological effect. For example, analgesics are organic compounds that relieve pain and
inflammation. Aspirin and ibuprofen are organic molecules, which contain a carboxyl
functional group and act as analgesics. These two analgesics also contain a benzene ring,
as is seen in Figure 12A–4.
CH3
O
OH
OH
CH3
O
H3C
O
O
Aspirin
Ibuprofen
Figure 12A–4 Pain-relieving and anti-inflammatory medications,
aspirin and ibuprofen, share a common carboxyl functional group
(highlighted in red).
Another important class of organic compounds used as pain-relieving medication is the
opioids, which are derivatives of the opium poppy plant. These compounds are highly
addictive and are often used to treat pain. Opioids contain an amine functional group,
causing some to be able to bind to specific receptors in the brain and block pain signals.
All opioids also contain at least one hydroxyl group, which is important for forming
interactions with proteins and improves their solubility in water. Lastly, opioids contain a
benzene ring, like aspirin and ibuprofen, that helps maintain the structural stability of the
drug. In Figure 12A–5, we can see the structure of two common pain-relieving opioids:
morphine and codeine.
N
CH3 CH3
CH3
N
HO
O
O
O
OH OH
Morphine
Codeine
Figure 12A–5 Morphine and codeine are both pain-relieving medications from the
opioid family and contain similar functional groups that help them achieve their desired
function: hydroxyl groups (red), an amine group (blue) and a benzene ring (yellow).
While codeine can be found in prescription pain medication that can be self-administered,
morphine is a more powerful drug that can only be administered by an authorised
healthcare professional. Despite these differences, we can see that morphine and codeine
both contain these similar functional groups, which are characteristic of the opioid
family of drugs. These groups are important for these analgesics to be able to achieve
their desired effect.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
12A ORGANIC COMPOUNDS AS MEDICINES
Antibiotics, such as penicillin, are organic compounds that can kill or inhibit the
growth of bacteria. Penicillin contains a beta-lactam (β-lactam) ring structure, as shown
in Figure 12A–6.
H
N
H
H
H
R
S
R1
O
N
467
R2
O
OH
O CO2
–
R
Carbapenems
N
β-lactam
ring O
Penicillins
O
H
N
O
N
–
CO2
Acyl-D-Ala-D-Ala
(cell wall precursor)
H
H
N
R2
S
H
N
R
O
N
O
N
R1
SO3H
O
O
O OH
Cephalosporins
Monobactams
Figure 12A–6 Classes of drugs that are used to treat bacterial infections, known as β-lactam antibiotics,
all contain a characteristic β-lactam ring (green) and some another functional group containing an
amide (orange).
In Figure 12A–6, it can be seen that all of these antibiotics contain structural similarities,
which, importantly, mimic a compound found in the bacteria, acyl-D-Ala-D-Ala. By having
the β-lactam ring (shown in green) and the amide group (shown in orange) in common
with the bacterial compound, these drugs mimic this cell wall precursor and are able to
form interactions with a bacterial enzyme to stop it from functioning. This mechanism of
action of medicines, where enzymes are blocked from working, will be discussed in greater
detail in Section 12B. LINK 12B ENZYMES
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
468 CHAPTER 12 MEDICINAL CHEMISTRY
HO
Another important class of organic compounds used as medicines is the steroids, which
are examples of terpenoids. These compounds can be used to treat inflammation and
immune system disorders. Steroids contain carbonyl and hydroxyl functional groups, which
contribute to their anti-inflammatory activity (Figure 12A–7).
CH2OH
CH2OH
O
CH2OH
H
C O
OH HO
C O C O
C
HO
O
O
O
Cortisol
Corticosterone
Aldosterone
Figure 12A–7 Steroids, which form an important class of therapeutic agents, all contain a number of carbonyl
(C=O, blue) and hydroxyl (–OH, red) functional groups.
Pharmacology
the branch of
medicine that
studies the origin,
chemistry and use
of drugs with their
associated effects
on the body
Enantiomer
a molecule
that has the
same chemical
formula and
similar physical
and structural
properties to
another, but the
two are mirror
images of each
other
In summary, the unique structure and functional groups of organic compounds allow
them to interact with biological systems in specific ways, making them valuable tools for
medicinal purposes. Overall, the structure and functional groups of organic compounds
used as medicines play a critical role in their biological activity and potential side effects. By
understanding the biochemical properties of these compounds, scientists can design more
effective and safer drugs to treat a variety of diseases and conditions.
Check-in questions – Set 1
1 Recall the main steps involved in solvent extraction.
2 Identify two functional groups that can be present in drugs or medication.
8A STRUCTURAL
DIVERSITY
IN ORGANIC
COMPOUNDS
LINK
Chiral
a shape or
structure that
cannot be
superimposed on
its mirror image.
Chiral is from the
Greek word for
‘hand’
Achiral
a shape or
structure that can
be superimposed
on its mirror
image
Isomers and chirality
Isomers are molecules that have the same molecular formula but different structural
arrangements. They can have different physical and chemical properties, and this can alter
the effectiveness of medicines significantly. For example, one isomer of a drug may be toxic,
while another may be safe for use in humans. Therefore, it is crucial to understand the
differences between isomers when developing drugs.
One type of isomer that is particularly important in pharmacology is the enantiomer.
Enantiomers are molecules that have the same chemical formula and similar physical and
structural properties, but are mirror images of each other. This means that they cannot be
superimposed on each other, just like your left and right hand cannot be superimposed on
each other, and they are said to be chiral, as represented in Figure 12A–8, which also shows
the opposite term, achiral. Enantiomers can have very different biological activity, even
though they have the same chemical formula. This is because many biological molecules,
such as enzymes and receptors, are also chiral and can only interact with one of the
enantiomers.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
12A ORGANIC COMPOUNDS AS MEDICINES
469
Chiral objects
Mirror
Left hand
Right hand Cannot be superimposed
Achiral objects
Mirror
Left hand Right hand Can be superimposed
Figure 12A–8 Chiral objects (top) are mirror images that cannot be superimposed on each other,
whereas achiral objects (bottom) can be superimposed on each other.
A chiral centre is an atom in a molecule that is bonded to four different groups (usually,
though three and two are also possible), and these groups can be arranged in two different
ways, resulting in two mirror image structures (Figure 12A–9). Chiral centres are important
because they help to determine whether a molecule is chiral or achiral. Molecules that
contain a chiral centre are usually chiral, while molecules that lack a chiral centre are
usually achiral. If a molecule is being investigated for use as a possible medicine, then it is
important to know whether the molecule is chiral or not. If it is chiral, then it is possible
that one enantiomer may have a beneficial effect while the other may be ineffective or have
a deleterious effect on the human body.
1
1
4
C 2
2
C 2
3
3
Chiral Achiral
Figure 12A–9 Chiral carbons have four different
groups bonded to them, whereas achiral
carbons have three or fewer different groups.
Chiral centre
an atom in a
molecule that is
bonded to four
different groups,
and these groups
can be arranged
in two different
ways, resulting
in two mirror
image structures
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
470 CHAPTER 12 MEDICINAL CHEMISTRY
VIDEO
WORKED
EXAMPLE 12A–1
Worked example 12A–1: Identifying chiral centres of a molecule
Determine if any of the carbons in the following molecule are chiral.
H
HO
H
H
H
321 4
C
C
C
H
H
H
H
H
Solution
Logic Process
Step 1 Look at the first carbon and
identify the atoms or groups that
it is bonded to.
The first carbon is bonded to three hydrogen
atoms and a CHOHCH2CH3 group.
Step 2 Look at the second carbon and
identify the atoms or groups that
it is bonded to.
The second carbon is bonded to a hydrogen
atom, a hydroxyl group (–OH), a methyl
group (–CH3) and an ethyl group (–CH2CH3).
Step 3 Look at the third carbon and
identify the atoms or groups that
it is bonded to.
The third carbon is bonded to two hydrogen
atoms, a methyl group (–CH3) and a
CHOHCH3 group.
Step 4 Look at the fourth carbon and
identify the atoms or groups that
it is bonded to.
The fourth carbon is bonded to three
hydrogen atoms and a CH2CHOHCH3
group.
Step 5 Determine if any of the carbons
are chiral.
The first, third and fourth carbons do not
have four different groups bonded to them
and so are achiral.
The second carbon does have four different
groups bonded to it and so is chiral.
C O C O
N N
C CH2
CH2 Mirror
H2C
H2C
C
H
H
O O
N
O
NH
HN
O
O
Chiral centre Chiral centre
O O
N
O
The significance of chiral centres in
medicine can be illustrated by the example
of thalidomide. Thalidomide was a drug
that was widely used in the 1950s and
1960s and was effective as a sedative and in
relieving nausea. As such, it was prescribed
to pregnant women in the first three
months of pregnancy to treat morning
sickness. The structure of thalidomide is
shown in Figure 12A–10. It can be seen
that thalidomide contains a chiral centre,
highlighted in green and shown in the inset.
R-thalidomide S-thalidomide
Figure 12A–10 Thalidomide exists as two
enantiomers, R and S, each with a chiral carbon
atom at its centre, shown in green (top). Both
enantiomers are shown as three-dimensional
ball-and-stick models (bottom).
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
12A ORGANIC COMPOUNDS AS MEDICINES
471
This chiral centre means that there are two enantiomers of thalidomide – R-thalidomide
and S-thalidomide. While this may not seem like a major issue, considering the chemical
composition and bonding is the same, it was later discovered that R-thalidomide was safe,
while S-thalidomide caused severe birth defects. With even further research, it was then
discovered that there was not really a safe enantiomer of thalidomide, as R-thalidomide gets
converted to the S enantiomer, which is toxic to the foetus. This had devastating effects,
with thousands of newborn children having missing or malformed limbs, and many dying
in early infancy. This tragic episode highlights the importance of understanding the effects
of chiral centres in drug development. Nowadays, if a new drug is planned to be marketed,
testing is carried out on each enantiomer separately. Pharmaceutical companies will
synthesise or separate the single enantiomer of the drug to ensure that a mixture of the two
enantiomers (a racemic mixture) is not given.
DOC
12A SKILLS
WORKSHEET
12A–1
CHIRAL ATOMS
AND CHIRAL
CENTRES
VIDEO 12A–1
SKILLS:
ANALYSING
THE DIFFERENT
TYPES OF EXAM
QUESTIONS
Analysing the different types of exam questions
Think about what you have learned in this chapter so far. You’ve connected new
knowledge related to various natural compounds found in plants and their role as
active ingredients in medicines. You have hopefully clued in to the fact that this ties in
neatly with previous knowledge about distillation for the separation and purification of
compounds, as you learned in Section 10B. It also connects to knowledge you developed
both in Unit 1 and earlier in Unit 4 around the various functional groups present in
organic compounds, such as hydroxyl, carboxyl and amine groups.
However, there is now a new addition to your knowledge – the identification of chiral
centres, where the carbon atom is surrounded by four different groups. While this is
not a new addition to the Study Design, and has been present in previous versions,
the context of this in relation to the effectiveness of medicines is new. But, don’t let
this scare you! Here, we provide examples of some questions you might see related to
this topic.
Firstly, you might be given a multiple-choice question and asked to identify which of the
four molecules are chiral, as shown from the options below.
A
H
H
Cl
H
B
H
H
C
C
C
H
C
C
CH2CH3
H
CH3
H
H
H
C
H
H
H
H
D
H
H
H
C
C
C
H
C
C
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
To be able to successfully complete this question, as opposed to simply guessing, you
need to recall the following points.
1 What does chiral mean?
A molecule with a mirror image that cannot be superimposed onto it.
2 How do you determine which carbon atom could be a chiral centre?
Eliminate carbon atoms with the following:
• CH3 group
• CH2 group
• C atoms involved in a double or triple intramolecular covalent bond.
LINK
10B ANALYSIS
OF PURITY AND
CONCENTRATION
LINK UNIT 1
LINK
LINK
8C FUNCTIONAL
GROUPS:
HALOALKANES,
AMINES AND
ALCOHOLS
8D FUNCTIONAL
GROUPS:
ALDEHYDES,
KETONES,
CARBOXYLIC
ACIDS AND
ESTERS
H
OH
C
H CH3
C
H H
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
472 CHAPTER 12 MEDICINAL CHEMISTRY
Applying these rules quickly eliminates A, C and D, leaving only B as the correct option,
where the chiral centre carbon atom is the one with the chlorine bonded to it.
Secondly, you might instead get a short-answer question that asks you to draw a named
molecule (for example 2-chloro-3-methylbutane) and identify the carbon atom at its
chiral centre with a justification of your choice. It is likely that a question such as this
would be broken up into parts and even include different molecules or cues for each part
so that you don’t lose all available marks by not knowing one step. For the sake of this
question, let’s complete this.
Logic Process
Step 1 Draw the molecule
H
2-chloro-3-methylbutane. C
H
H
H
CH3
Cl
C
H
H
C
H
H
Step 2 Identify the carbon atom that is the
chiral centre.
The two terminal carbon atoms (carbon
atoms at each end) and the methyl
group off the third carbon atom in the
main chain can be ruled out as they
are all –CH3 groups. This leaves only
the second and third carbon atoms in
the main chain. In this example, both
of these atoms are chiral centres.
Step 3 Justification of these carbon atoms
being the chiral centres.
The reason why each of these carbon
atoms are chiral centres is because
they are not carbon atoms with either
three hydrogen or two hydrogen atoms
attached, and the molecule is an alkane,
so it has no double or triple bonds like
those seen in alkenes and alkynes,
respectively. As each of these carbon
atoms is covalently bonded to four
different groups, each could be the
chiral centre.
The key to improving, if you are struggling, is to use the questions in this textbook and
in the exam generator online, which has past VCAA exam questions with solutions,
to further hone your skills. Make sure you target specific areas by selecting from the
various topics present, reading through the worked solutions and using the experience
and support of your teacher and peers.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
12A ORGANIC COMPOUNDS AS MEDICINES
473
Section 12A questions
1 Explain the basis of separation in the purification of natural plant compounds by
a solvent extraction.
b distillation.
2 Define ‘chiral’ and ‘achiral’.
3 Indicate whether or not each of the following molecules exists as a pair of enantiomers.
a
c Cl Cl
NH2
d
CH3 O
b OH
H3C
OH
NH2
4 A synthetic chemist is interested in modifying a functional group of an antibacterial
drug molecule to create a derivative. The original drug molecule has a hydroxyl group
(–OH) attached to a specific position. The chemist modifies this functional group to a
methyl group (–CH3).
a Explain how the modification of the functional group might affect the solubility of
the drug.
b Explain how the modification of the functional group might affect the antibacterial
activity of the drug.
5 The structure of fluoxetine, an antidepressant belonging to the selective serotonin
re-uptake inhibitor (SSRI) class, is shown below.
H
N O
F
F
F
a Identify the chiral centre(s) in the structure of fluoxetine.
b Based on the presence of chiral centres in fluoxetine, discuss whether it exists as a
pair of enantiomers.
c Explain how enantiomers can have different biological activities despite having the
same chemical formula.
6 Artemisinin is an antimalarial drug derived from the plant Artemisia annua, commonly
known as sweet wormwood. It is a key component in the treatment of malaria,
particularly for drug-resistant strains. The structure of artemisinin is shown below.
H
O
O
O
H
H
O
O
a Describe two advantages of obtaining artemisinin from natural sources (Artemisia
annua) compared to synthetic production.
b Identify two functional groups present in the structure of artemisinin.
c Discuss the potential significance of the functional groups in the mechanism of
action of artemisinin against malaria.
d Is artemisinin a chiral molecule? Provide a justification for your answer.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
474 CHAPTER 12 MEDICINAL CHEMISTRY
12B
Enzymes
Study Design:
•
Enzymes as protein-based catalysts in
living systems: primary, secondary, tertiary
and quaternary structures and changes in
enzyme function in terms of structure and
bonding as a result of increased temperature
(denaturation), decreased temperature
(lowered activity) or changes in pH
(formation of zwitterions and denaturation)
•
Medicines that function as competitive
enzyme inhibitors: organic molecules that
bind through lock-and-key mechanism
to an active site preventing binding of the
actual substrate
Glossary:
Active site
Competitive inhibition
Denatured
Monomer
Peptide bond
Polymer
Polypeptide
Substrate
Zwitterion
ENGAGE
The connection between heartburn and enzymes
Heartburn, caused by acid reflux, is a medical condition that is estimated to affect
around 20% of the population worldwide. This occurs when acid from the stomach
escapes and travels back up the oesophagus, which leads to a burning sensation in
the chest (that is, heartburn), nausea, vomiting and a sensation of constantly having
a lump in the throat. Medications, such as omeprazole, have been developed that can
help reduce the production of stomach acid and decrease the symptoms that people
experience. Omeprazole, as well as other treatments for reflux, often target an important
step in the process involving a special type of protein known as an enzyme. In this
section, you are going to learn about enzymes as catalysts in the body, as well as how
they can be targeted and disrupted for the treatment of disease.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
12B EnzYMES
475
EXPLAIN
Amino acids
Many molecules in the body are
Carboxyl
present as polymers, that is, they are
composed of a series of repeating
H
Amine Hydrogen
subunits known as monomers. Proteins
are an example of biological polymers.
H
The building blocks (monomers) of
H
O
proteins are known as α-amino acids.
The generalised structure of an
α-amino acid is illustrated in Figure
C
N C
12B–1. An α-amino acid molecule
has a central carbon atom to which is
H
O
attached an amine functional group
R
(–NH2), a carboxyl functional group
(–COOH), a hydrogen atom (H)
and a group (R) that varies from one
Variable
group
(R group)
α-amino acid molecule to another. If
R is not a hydrogen atom, the central
Figure 12B–1 The generalised structure of an α-amino
acid, the building blocks of proteins
carbon atom is chiral and the α-amino
acid molecule will be chiral.
The other important feature of an α-amino acid is the variable group, or R group
(highlighted in green). All the α-amino acids are identical in all other parts of their
structure – that is, they all have exactly the same amine group (grey), hydrogen (blue) and
carboxyl group (red). The only thing that differentiates the 20 α-amino acids found in the
body is the variable group.
Peptide bonds
As already mentioned, α-amino acids are the monomers that make up proteins. For this
to occur, the α-amino acids need to join to each other to make a long chain, known as the
polypeptide chain. This occurs through the formation of the peptide bond.
2 hydrogen atoms and 1 oxygen atom form water
H
H
H
H
H
O
H
H
H
H
H
O
H
O
H
N
C
C
+
O
C
N C
+
C
N C
N
C
C
O
H
R2
H
O
H
O
H
O
R1 R2
R1
Peptide bond
(amide, –CONH2,
functional group)
Amino acid 1 Amino acid 2 Dipeptide Water
+ +
Figure 12B–2 A condensation reaction between two α-amino acids to form a dipeptide with a peptide
bond. This reaction is repeated numerous times to form a polypeptide chain.
There are a couple of aspects of the reaction illustrated in Figure 12B–2 that should
be highlighted. Firstly, the reaction to link two amino acids together is a condensation
reaction – a second, small product is generated in the form of water. Secondly, the peptide
bond is an example of an amide functional group (–CONH2), highlighted in yellow.
LINK UNIT 1
Polymer
a long-chain
molecule
made up of a
large number
of smaller
repeating units
(monomers)
Monomer
a molecule
that forms
bonds with
other identical
molecules as the
repeating units
that make up a
polymer
LINK
12A ORGANIC
COMPOUNDS AS
MEDICINES
Polypeptide
a long chain of
α-amino acids
forming part of
a protein
Peptide bond
a chemical bond
between two
amino acids
LINK
9B ORGANIC
REACTIONS:
CONDENSATION
AND
HYDROLYSIS
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
Alanine
H
C
O
N
H
C
O
476 CHAPTER 12 MEDICINAL CHEMISTRY
Proteins
After these amino acids have bonded together to form long polypeptide chains, they begin
to fold and adopt unique structures. These unique structures are critical for being able to
perform their function in the body. There are four levels of protein structure, each building
on the foundation laid by the previous level.
Primary structure
Primary structure is defined as the sequence of α-amino acids joined by peptide (amide)
bonds that make up a single polypeptide chain, as shown in Figure 12B–3. Each R group,
which is different for each of the 20 α-amino acids, is represented in a different colour, with
the amide bond connecting amino acids shown in yellow highlight.
Lysine Phenylalanine Glutamine Isoleucine Cysteine
H H
N
H
H
H
H
HC
HC
HC
HC
H
HC
N H
N O
C
H
H
HC
HC
H
N
H
H
H H
C
C
H
C
O
N
H
C
H
C
H
C
O
N
H
C
H
C
O
H
H
H
CH
H
N
H
HC
HC
HC
H
S
HC
C
H
C
O
N
H
C
H
Amide bonds
Figure 12B–3 Primary structure of a six α-amino acid sequence composing part of a single polypeptide chain
Beta-pleated sheet
Alpha helix
H
N
CO
C
C O
C
N
H
C
C
C
O
NH
C
O C
C H
O
N
C
N H
C
C
C H
O
N
H
C
N
O
C
H
N
C
O
C O
C
NH
C
O C
CO
N H
H
C
N
O
C H
O
N
Secondary structure
This is the level of protein structure one level up
from the primary structure, where sections of a
single polypeptide chain fold into specific structures
called alpha helices and beta-pleated sheets. These
specific structures, shown in Figure 12B–4, are held
together by hydrogen bonds between the polar –NH
group in one amide functional group (peptide bond)
and the polar –C=O group in a different amide
functional group (peptide bond). Alpha helices
form when an amino acid chain forms a three-
dimensional spiral shape, whereas beta-pleated
sheets form when two amino acid chains line up
parallel to each other.
H
N
CO
N
H
C
C O
C
N
H
C
C
C
C
O
NH
C
O C
C
C H
O
N
H
C
N
O
Figure 12B–4 Regions of polypeptide chains folded
H
N
N H
C
O
into specific secondary structures; alpha helices (right)
and beta-pleated sheets (left) are held together through
hydrogen bonding between amine and carboxyl functional
C
groups of different amino acids.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al © Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
Hydrogen
bond
C
C
12B EnzYMES
477
Tertiary structure
This level of protein structure is one level up from the secondary structure and is the
overall functional three-dimensional structure of an entire single polypeptide chain due
to folding of the respective alpha helices and beta-pleated sheets. There are examples of
proteins that are completely functional as a single polypeptide chain, such as myoglobin,
present in heart and skeletal muscles. This overall three-dimensional structure is formed
through many types of bonds and interactions between the R groups (or side chains)
of separate α-amino acids. The types of bonds involved are shown in Figure 12B–5 and
summarised in Table 12B–1.
(1)
Hydrophobic
interaction
Random coils
(3)
Covalent bond
CH2
S
S
CH2
H3C
CH3
CH2
HC
CH2
CH
H3C
CH3
CH2 CH2
CH2
SH
(4)
Hydrogen bond
H
O
CH2
H2C
O
H
O
+
NH3
C
CH2
O–
O
(2)
Ionic bond
CH2
H2N
C
C
OH
O
H
N
N
Alpha helix
Beta-pleated sheet
CH2
Hydrogen bonds holding
secondary structures together
(5)
Dipole–dipole
interaction
Figure 12B–5 Single polypeptide chain held together in functional three-dimensional arrangement
due to different types of bonding between R groups of different amino acids
Table 12B–1 Different types of bonds associated with tertiary structure of proteins
Explanation Hydrophobic interactions Type of bond/interaction
present in tertiary structure
Dispersion forces acting
between different non-polar
R groups
Example from Figure 12B–5
Between two valine α-amino
acids (1)
Ionic interaction Between –NH3
+ part of one
R group and –COO– part of a
different R group
Between lysine and aspartic
acid α-amino acids (2)
Covalent bonding Disulfide bridge, –S–S– Between two cysteine
α-amino acids (3)
Hydrogen bonding Between –O–H, –N–H, –C=O
part of one R group and any
one of these in a part of a
different R group
Between serine and
asparagine α-amino acids (4)
Dipole–dipole interaction Between partially charged
parts, such as –S–H, –N–H
or –O–H, of polar R groups
Between aspartic acid and
histidine α-amino acids (5)
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
478 CHAPTER 12 MEDICINAL CHEMISTRY
Quaternary structure
Some proteins, such as enzymes, which you will learn about later in this chapter, are
composed of two or more polypeptide chains. These proteins are referred to as having
a quaternary structure. One example is an antibody, shown in Figure 12B–6, which is
produced within the immune system to combat pathogens. The quaternary structure
is held together by the same types of bonds and interactions that are present within the
tertiary structure, however, here they occur between different polypeptide chains to shape
them into a functional three-dimensional shape, as opposed to the single polypeptide chain
(tertiary structure).
Light
chain
-S-S-
Heavy
chain
-S-S-
Light
chain
-S-S-
-S-S-
Heavy
chain
Figure 12B–6 Quaternary structure of an antibody represented as a computer-generated space-filling model (left), crystal
structure (middle) and simplified diagram (right). The four polypeptides are represented here as different colours.
VIDEO 12B–1
BONDING AND
INTERACTIONS
PRESENT IN
PROTEINS
WORKSHEET
12B–1
COMPARING
THE LEVELS
OF PROTEIN
STRUCTURE
As can be seen in Figures 12B–3 to 12B–6, the four levels of protein structure all involve
interactions between various parts of the amino acids. The types of bonds involved in each
level are summarised in Table 12B–2.
Table 12B–2 Bonds associated with the different levels of protein structure
DOC
Levels of
protein
structure
Types of bonds involved
Primary Peptide/amide bond between α-amino acids
Secondary Hydrogen bonding between the oxygen in the C=O of an amide functional
group at one site in the polypeptide chain and a hydrogen in the N–H of
an amide functional group at a different site in the polypeptide chain
Tertiary Hydrogen bonding, ionic bonding, covalent bonding, hydrophobic
interactions, disulfide bonding and dipole–dipole interactions between
the R groups of the α-amino acids
Quaternary Same as tertiary structure, but happening between multiple
polypeptide chains
1C EXOTHERMIC
AND
ENDOTHERMIC
REACTIONS
LINK
Enzymes
Enzymes are a class of proteins known as biological catalysts. As you learned in Section 1C,
all chemical reactions have an energy threshold that needs to be overcome for the reaction
to occur. This threshold is known as the activation energy. As was discussed previously with
catalysts, enzymes speed up (catalyse) chemical reactions within organisms by lowering this
activation energy. This means that less energy is required for the reaction to take place, and
therefore, the reaction can occur more frequently. This is illustrated in Figure 12B–7.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
12B EnzYMES
479
Without enzyme With enzyme
Activation energy,
without enzyme
Energy (arbitrary units)
Activation energy,
with enzyme
Reactants
Products
Reaction pathway
Figure 12B–7 Enzymes speed up biological reactions by lowering the activation energy.
The functional three-dimensional structures of proteins are particularly important for them
to be able to perform their desired function. This is no different for enzymes because they
are proteins. Proteins with a functional three-dimensional tertiary or quaternary structure
are chiral molecules. They have a pocket, called the active site, which is complementary
to the stereochemistry of their specific reactant(s), known as substrate(s). Referring back
to Section 12A, take the example of thalidomide. An enzyme may bind specifically to
R-thalidomide but not S-thalidomide, which are enantiomers. For the reaction to occur,
the substrate must successfully bind to the enzyme at its active site. It is important to
realise that the shape and charge of the active site are unique to each enzyme and are
complementary to the shape and charge of the enantiomer that binds to it. This feature is
what provides enzymes with their high level of specificity in terms of what they will bind to.
It also explains why one enantiomer is biologically active but its mirror image enantiomer is
not: the first will bind to an enzyme but the second won’t. Earlier, we discussed the general
structures of α-amino acids. The R group is the part of the α-amino acid structure that
makes each amino acid unique. These R groups are very important during the interaction
of an enzyme’s active site with its substrate. The specific α-amino acids found in the active
site help to determine the specificity of the enzyme, through having R groups that will only
interact and bind with that substrate.
As represented in Figure 12B–8, the interaction between the substrate(s) and the
enzyme active site occurs via a lock-and-key mechanism. Essentially, this means that
the substrate(s) (the key) has a complementary shape to the active site (the lock). As
this interaction requires the shapes of both the substrate(s) and the active site to align,
this feature means that enzymes have a very high specificity. The active site allows more
successful collisions between substrates in a reaction than would normally occur without
the presence of an enzyme.
Active site
the region of an
enzyme where
the substrate(s),
also known as
reactants, bind
for a chemical
reaction to take
place
Substrate
reactant
molecule(s) that
binds to the
active site of an
enzyme and then
takes part in a
reaction
LINK
12A ORGANIC
COMPOUNDS AS
MEDICINES
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
480 CHAPTER 12 MEDICINAL CHEMISTRY
Key (substrate)
Lock-and-key model Substrate
Active site
Lock (enzyme)
Enzyme
Lock-and-key complex
Enzyme–substrate complex
Figure 12B–8 The lock-
and-key model describes
the interaction between a
substrate and an enzyme.
Once the substrate(s) has bound to the active site, there are two main categories of reaction
that can take place, as shown in Figure 12B–9.
Exothermic reactions: breaking down large molecules into smaller ones with the release of energy
Substrate
Products
Energy (arbitrary units)
Reactants
Energy
released
Products
Enzyme–substrate
complex
Enzyme Enzyme
Reaction pathway
Endothermic reactions: building larger molecules from smaller ones, requiring energy input
Product
Substrates
Energy (arbitrary units)
Reactants
Products
Energy required
Enzyme–substrate
complex
Enzyme Enzyme
Reaction pathway
Figure 12B–9 Reactions catalysed by enzymes can either be exothermic (top) or endothermic (bottom) depending
on whether they are breaking down molecules or building them.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
12B EnzYMES
481
If a larger substrate is broken down into smaller products, the reaction is exothermic.
Exothermic reactions release energy, so the products have less energy than the reactants.
An example of a biological reaction that is exothermic is cellular respiration, which you
studied in Section 1B. On the other hand, if the reaction involves smaller substrates being
built up into larger products, the reaction is endothermic. Endothermic reactions require
energy, so the energy of the products is greater than the reactants. An example of an
endothermic reaction is the formation of a dipeptide from two amino acids, which was
discussed earlier in this section.
LINK
1B PRODUCTION
OF CHEMICAL
ENERGY IN
NATURE
Check-in questions – Set 1
1 What are the four levels of protein structure?
2 How does an enzyme speed up biological reactions?
3 Draw an energy profile diagram for an enzyme reaction in which a single substrate is
broken down into two products.
Above the optimum
temperature, the
rate of reaction
decreases quickly
Factors affecting enzyme activity
As discussed, enzymes function to increase the rate of biological reactions. However, there
are a number of factors that can affect their ability to do this, such as temperature, pH and
the presence of inhibitors.
Temperature
Temperature is one of the
most important factors that
control the activity of an
enzyme. All enzymes have an
optimal temperature – that is,
the temperature at which they
function best. For most enzymes
within the human body, it makes
sense that this temperature
is around 37°C. The effect of
temperature on enzyme activity
differs depending on whether
it is above or below the optimal
temperature. This is highlighted
in Figure 12B–10, which
shows the rate of reaction for a
typical human enzyme across a
temperature range.
Next, we will consider how
the shape of this curve can be
explained in terms of what is
happening with the chemistry of
enzymes at a molecular level.
Optimal temperature
As temperature
increases, the rate
of reaction increases
more quickly
Enzymes becoming
denatured
Rate of reaction (arbitrary units)
0
10 20 30 40 50 60
Temperature (°C)
Figure 12B–10 The rate of reaction for a typical human enzyme across a range of
temperatures
Enzymes
completely
denatured
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
482 CHAPTER 12 MEDICINAL CHEMISTRY
5A WHAT
CAUSES A
CHEMICAL
REACTION?
LINK
Enzyme activity below optimal temperature
Figure 12B–10 shows that at low temperatures the enzyme activity is reduced. As the
temperature increases from 0°C towards the optimal temperature, the enzyme activity (and
so the rate of reaction) also increases. The explanation for this involves understanding the
relationship between temperature and the kinetic energy (related to speed of vibration or
other movement) that molecules have, which was discussed earlier in Section 5A. The faster
something is moving or vibrating, the more kinetic energy it has. Temperature is a measure
of the average kinetic energy of atoms and molecules, and adding heat energy raises their
speed, kinetic energy and therefore temperature (Figure 12B–11).
Adding
heat energy
Lower
temperature
Higher
temperature
5A WHAT
CAUSES A
CHEMICAL
REACTION?
LINK
Figure 12B–11 At higher temperatures, particles have more kinetic energy. As the particles are
moving around more quickly, there will be more successful interactions between the enzyme’s active
site and substrates, leading to an increased rate of reaction.
However, how is the speed at which these molecules are moving around related to the rate
at which they function? Imagine that you and a friend are in your chemistry laboratory,
are blindfolded and told to walk around for a 10-minute experiment. You are told to keep
count of the number of times you collide with each other, as this will represent every time
that a substrate and enzyme active site interact with each other. Now imagine doing this
experiment a second time, but instead of walking, you are told to run around as fast as you
can. In which experiment do you think you would bump into each other more often? The
most likely answer would be experiment number 2.
By thinking about it this way, you can appreciate why an increase in temperature may lead
to an increase in enzyme activity. For this to happen, the molecules first need to collide,
but they also need to interact in such a way that the substrate binds successfully with the
active site of the enzyme. From this you may realise that, while many things need to go right
for an enzyme reaction to occur, the greater the kinetic energy of both the enzyme and the
substrate, the more likely it is to occur. This is exactly the same concept that was discussed
in collision theory and rates of reaction in Section 5A.
Enzyme activity above optimal temperature
As can be seen in Figure 12B–10, when the temperature exceeds the optimal temperature,
there is a sharp decrease in the rate of reaction. To understand what is happening under these
conditions, it is important to remember this important fact: enzymes are proteins.
At higher temperatures, the bonds and interactions that form the tertiary and quaternary
structures, specifically the hydrophobic interactions, ionic interactions, hydrogen bonding
and dipole–dipole interactions (intermolecular interactions), of a protein begin to break
down due to increasing vibrations in the molecules. Additionally, the hydrogen bonds
holding the alpha helix and beta-pleated sheet secondary structures together also break.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
12B EnzYMES
483
When this occurs, we say that the enzyme is being denatured and the process is called
denaturation. Unlike reversible reduced enzyme activity due to temperatures lower than
optimal, this process is permanent, so once an enzyme is denatured it will not function
properly again. So why does this process have such a profound effect on the activity of
an enzyme?
It is easier to illustrate this by looking at what happens in a series of steps.
Step 1:  At the optimal temperature, binding of the substrate to the enzyme active site
occurs normally.
Step 2:  As the temperature increases beyond the optimum, the enzyme’s three-dimensional
conformational shape changes.
Step 3:  The specific structure of the active site begins to disappear, which means that the
substrate is no longer complementary and cannot bind.
Step 4: Enzyme activity becomes zero, as substrate interaction is no longer possible.
This process is shown in Figure 12B–12.
Denatured
refers to an
enzyme that
has lost its
conformational
three-
dimensional
structure and
hence cannot
function as a
catalyst
Substrate
Substrate cannot
enter active site
Unchanged
substrate
leaves
enzyme
Active
site
Enzyme
Denatured
enzyme
Heat
Figure 12B–12 An increase in temperature denatures the enzyme, which leads to a change in
the conformation of the active site, so the substrate is unable to bind and the enzyme is unable
to function.
pH
pH is another factor that can affect the function of an enzyme. Figure 12B–13 shows a
summary of how a number of enzymes in the body function at different pH levels.
Salivary amylase
(optimal pH 6–7)
Pepsin
(optimal pH 1.5–2)
Alkaline phosphatase
(optimal pH 8–10)
Rate of reaction
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
9 10
pH
Figure 12B–13 The effect of pH on the rate of reactions catalysed by
different enzymes within the human body
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
484 CHAPTER 12 MEDICINAL CHEMISTRY
UNIT 2
LINK
Zwitterion
a molecule with
equal positive
and negative
charges, giving
it an overall
neutral charge;
also called a
dipolar ion
Firstly, different enzymes within the body function at different optimal pH values. pH
values of different environments within organisms can vary greatly. Therefore, it is not
surprising that enzymes have an optimal pH that suits the environment that they function
in. For example, pepsin (an enzyme found in the stomach) has an optimal pH of 1.5–2,
which suits the acidic nature of gastric juices. In contrast, salivary amylase works best at a
pH of around 6.5, which is appropriate for the neutral pH environment of the mouth.
Secondly, the rate of reaction on either side of the optimal pH changes quickly. You
may recall from Unit 2 that as the pH decreases (becomes more acidic), hydrogen ion
concentration increases, and when the pH increases (becomes more basic), hydrogen ion
concentration decreases. You should also recall from earlier in this section that amino acids
contain polar carboxyl (–COOH) and polar amine (–NH2) groups. In aqueous solutions
the amine functional group can accept a hydrogen ion, or proton, and therefore act as a
base. Alternatively, the carboxyl functional group can donate a hydrogen ion, or proton,
therefore acting as an acid. Consequently, amino acids in solution may be in the form of a
zwitterion, as shown in Figure 12B–14.
–
H
O
H
H
O
H
H
N C
C
H
+
N C
C
H
H
O
O
R
R
Non-ionised form
of amino acid
Ionised form of
amino acid (zwitterion)
Figure 12B–14 Comparison between the non-ionised (left) and ionised,
or zwitterion (right), forms of an α-amino acid
Therefore, changes to pH can affect some of
the R groups of α-amino acids. As a result, the
conformational shape of an enzyme changes due to
disruptions of the interactions between α-amino acids’
R groups within the tertiary and quaternary levels of
protein structure. An example of this can be seen in
Figure 12B–5 on page 477, and the ionic interaction
between lysine and glutamic acid α-amino acids.
A zoomed-in version of this interaction is shown in
Figure 12B–15.
NH2
–
O N
+
H
H
O
Lysine
H
–
O O
–
O
H2N
O
Glutamic acid
In neutral pH ranges, this interaction is likely to occur.
However, as the pH decreases and becomes more acidic,
the carboxyl functional group in each glutamic acid
molecule is less likely to ionise (donate its hydrogen
Figure 12B–15 The ionic
interaction between the α-amino
acids, lysine (left) and glutamic
acid (right). Note, lysine is present
as a zwitterion in this interaction.
ion), meaning it will not possess a negative charge.
Therefore, this ionic interaction will not occur and the tertiary (or quaternary) structure of
the enzyme will be affected. Likewise, if the pH increases and becomes more basic, the amine
functional group in lysine is less likely to ionise (accept a hydrogen ion). Therefore, it will not
possess a positive charge. Again, the ionic interaction will be disrupted.
As you can see, changes in pH have a drastic effect on the stability of an enzyme’s tertiary
and quaternary (if present) structures. This would consequently affect the enzyme’s active
site, causing the rate of reaction or enzyme activity to decrease quickly.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
12B EnzYMES
485
Changes in pH, in a similar way to an increase in temperature above an enzyme’s optimal
temperature, can also lead to denaturation. Remember that denaturation is a permanent
process due to disruption of the hydrogen bonds holding alpha helices and beta-pleated
sheets (secondary structures) together, as well as the interactions and bonding within
the tertiary and quaternary levels of protein structure. It is important to note that the
strong covalent bonds (amide, or peptide bonds) between amino acids in the polypeptide
chain (primary structure) are not disrupted. So, even though the conformational three-
dimensional shape of the enzyme, and as such its active site, is altered, the specific sequence
of amino acids comprising the protein is not.
Competitive inhibition
An enzyme’s active site is critical to its ability to function. The active site is the
location where the substrate binds to the enzyme, allowing the reaction to take place
(Figure 12B–16). Previously, you learned how this mechanism is often described as being
like a lock and a key. If this analogy is taken further, imagine that a person returned home
one day and found that someone had jammed something into the lock of their front door.
In this case, the key would no longer be able to fit and the person wouldn’t be able to unlock
and open their door.
The same principle governs competitive inhibition. In competitive inhibition, an inhibitor
binds to the active site of the enzyme instead of the substrate. It is able to do this because it
has a shape and charge that mimic the substrate (or a complementary shape and charge to
the active site), thus fitting the active site. In this situation, the inhibitor and the substrate
compete with each other to bind to the active site, which is why this process is referred to
as competitive inhibition. With the inhibitor bound, the substrate is unable to access the
active site and the enzyme cannot function.
Normal enzyme reaction
Competitive
inhibition
the process
of disrupting
the function
of an enzyme
by blocking
its active site
with a molecule
other than the
substrate
Products
Substrate
Enzyme Enzyme
Enzyme–substrate complex
Competitive inhibition
STOP
Inhibitor
Enzyme Substrate Enzyme–inhibitor
complex
Inhibitor binds to active site,
preventing the substrate from
binding
Figure 12B–16 The normal function of an enzyme can be blocked through competitive inhibition,
where an inhibitor interacts with the active site, preventing the substrate from binding.
As enzymes play a vital role in almost all biological processes in organisms, competitive
enzyme inhibitors have become a valuable therapeutic option. These inhibitors work
as a type of medicine (or drug) by blocking the activity of specific enzymes in the body.
These enzymes are responsible for carrying out a wide range of biochemical reactions,
from breaking down food to producing essential molecules for the body. By inhibiting
these enzymes, competitive inhibitors can help to regulate or reduce the activity of certain
biochemical pathways, which can lead to therapeutic benefits.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
486 CHAPTER 12 MEDICINAL CHEMISTRY
One example of a competitive enzyme inhibitor used as a medicine is the drug Simvastatin,
which is used to lower high blood cholesterol levels in patients (Figure 12B–17).
Simvastatin works by blocking the active site, and therefore the activity, of an enzyme called
HMG–CoA reductase, responsible for producing cholesterol in the liver. By inhibiting this
enzyme, simvastatin can reduce the amount of cholesterol produced by the liver, leading to
a decrease in blood cholesterol.
WORKSHEET
12B–2
FACTORS
AFFECTING
ENZYME
ACTIVITY
DOC
Figure 12B–17 The drug Simvastatin is taken by people
with high blood cholesterol to block HMG-CoA reductase,
an enzyme in the biochemical pathway responsible for
cholesterol produced by the liver.
Simvastatin is a great example of how competitive enzyme inhibitors can be used to
reduce the natural activity of enzymes within the body. However, foreign organisms, such
as viruses and bacteria, also rely on enzymes for a number of their processes. Therefore,
these enzymes can also be a target for treatments against infections. Indeed, many
antibiotics treat bacterial infections by inhibiting the function of enzymes needed by the
bacteria to survive.
Another famous example of a competitive enzyme inhibitor that has been incredibly
successful as a medication is Relenza. Relenza is a medication developed to treat influenza,
a highly contagious respiratory infection caused by the influenza virus. Relenza is a type
of antiviral medication known as a neuraminidase inhibitor. Taken orally, the drug travels
down into the the lungs where it binds to the active site of the neuraminidase enzyme on
the surface of the influenza virus particles. By blocking this enzyme, the virus is unable to
be released from the host cell it has infected and therefore does not spread to infect new
uninfected cells in the body. This can help to reduce the severity and duration of influenza
symptoms, as well as prevent complications from the virus.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
12B SKILLS
12B EnzYMES
487
VIDEO 12B–2
SKILLS:
STRUCTURAL
DIAGRAMS AND
SPECIFICITIES
OF THE 20
DIFFERENT
AMINO ACIDS
Structural diagrams and specificities of the 20 different amino acids
In this section, you learned that there are 20 different α-amino acids, each of which has a
different R, or variable, group. These 20 α-amino acids with their R groups are shown in
Figure 12B–18.
Types of amino acids
Nonpolar
+ Charge
H2N
H
COOH
Glycine
(Gly/G)
H2N COOH
Leucine
(Leu/L)
CH3
H2N H2N
COOH COOH
Alanine
(Ala/A)
Valine
(Val/V)
S
H2N
COOH
H2N
COOH
Isoleucine
(Ile/I)
Methionine
(Met/M)
SH
H2N
COOH N
H
Cysteine
(Cyc/C)
N
H
H2N
COOH
Tryptophan
(Trp/W)
COOH
Proline
(Pro/P)
H2N
COOH
Phenylalanine
(Phe/F)
NH3+
H2N
COOH
H2N
Lysine
(Lys/K)
HN
H2N
COOH
Histidine
(His/H)
H2N NH2+
NH
COOH
Arginine
(Arg/R)
NH+
Polar
– Charge
H2N
OH
COOH
Serine
(Ser/S)
H2N
OH
COOH
Threonine
(Thr/T)
OH O O
NH2
NH2
COOH
H2N COOH
H2N
Tyrosine
(Tyr/Y)
Asparagine
(Asn/N)
H2N
COOH
Glutamine
(Gln/Q)
H2N
O
OH–
COOH
Aspartic acid
(Asn/D)
O OH–
H2N
COOH
Glutamic acid
(Gln/Q)
Figure 12B–18 The structural formulas of the 20 different α-amino acids at neutral pH,
categorised by the properties based on their R groups
As VCE students, it is not important for you to memorise the specific structure of
each R group and which α-amino acid it belongs to. In previous Study Designs, these
amino acids have all been provided in the VCAA Chemistry Data Book, which you have
available for School-Assessed Coursework and Examinations. It is anticipated you will
continue to be provided with these.
However, what you are not provided with is the breakdown of which α-amino acids are
polar, non-polar, positively or negatively charged, which is shown in Figure 12B–18. You
must use your knowledge established back in the covalent molecules chapter in Unit 1
to identify key features of these that could characterise them as polar or non-polar. The
presence of –O–H and –N–H polar bonds should indicate that an α-amino acid will be
polar due to the formation of partial charges, which allow it to form either dipole–dipole
interactions or hydrogen bonds. α-Amino acids that display the presence of a full
LINK UNIT 1
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
488 CHAPTER 12 MEDICINAL CHEMISTRY
negative charge on the –COO– carboxyl functional group in their R group would be
capable of forming an ionic interaction with the R group of another α-amino acid that
has a full positive charge. This should bring you back to your understanding of ionic
bonding, which you developed in Unit 1. It is these types of interactions that are key to
you understanding the formation of primary, secondary, tertiary and quaternary levels of
protein structure, and subsequently your ability to anticipate and explain effects on each
of these structural levels based on pH or temperature changes.
Section 12B questions
1 Amino acids are the building blocks of proteins, with just 20 different amino acids
making up thousands of proteins in the human body.
a Describe the similarities shared by the 20 α-amino acids.
b What differentiates the 20 α-amino acids from each other?
c Explain how two proteins composed of the same set of α-amino acids can exhibit
drastic differences in their properties.
2 What kind of bond links α-amino acids together in a polypeptide chain?
3 Identify two common types of secondary structures found in proteins.
4 Match each of the following statements with the appropriate level of protein structure
(primary, secondary, tertiary or quaternary). Multiple options may apply in some cases.
a the linear sequence of α-amino acids in a polypeptide chain
b alpha helices and beta-sheets formed by hydrogen bonding between α-amino acid
residues
c the overall three-dimensional folding of a single polypeptide chain
d the interaction of multiple polypeptide chains to form a functional protein
e disulfide bridges between cysteine residues
f interactions between R groups of α-amino acids
5 Define the following terms.
a enzyme
b substrate
c active site
6 Indicate whether each of the following statements is true or false. For those that are
false, rewrite the statement to make it true.
a Enzymes increase the activation energy required for a chemical reaction.
b Enzymes are specific in their substrate recognition.
c The lock-and-key model suggests that enzymes change their shape to accommodate
the substrate.
d Denaturation of an enzyme alters its primary structure.
e Enzymes can only function optimally at a narrow range of pH and temperature.
f Competitive inhibitors bind to the active site of an enzyme.
g Enzymes can be reused and are not consumed in a reaction.
h All enzymes function optimally at a pH of 7.
i Enzymes are capable of turning an endothermic reaction into an exothermic reaction.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
12B EnzYMES
489
7 The rate of reaction for a typical human enzyme across a temperature range is shown
below. Explain the trends observed in the regions labelled A and B and compare the
processes happening there.
Rate of reaction (arbitrary units)
A
B
0
10 20 30 40 50 60
Temperature (°C)
8 One example of an α-amino acid that exists mostly as a zwitterion is aspartic acid, which
has the R group, CH2COOH.
a Draw the structural formula for aspartic acid, clearly labelling the following in your
structure:
amine group carboxyl group chiral carbon atom R group
b Explain how and why the structure of the zwitterion you drew in part a changes if an
aqueous solution containing the amino acid was at each of the following pH values. In
your answer, draw the structure that would form, making sure to include the correct
charges that would be present.
i pH 7
ii pH 3
iii pH 11
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
490
Chapter 12 review
Summary
Create your own set of summary notes for this chapter, on paper or in a digital document. A model
summary is provided in the Teacher Resources and can be used to compare with yours.
Checklist
In the Interactive Textbook, the success criteria are linked from the review questions and will be
automatically ticked when answers are correct. Alternatively, print or photocopy this page and tick
the boxes when you have answered the corresponding questions correctly.
Success criteria – I am now able to: Linked questions
12A.1 12A.2 12A.3 12A.4 12A.5 12A.6 12A.7 12A.8 12B.1 12B.2 12B.3 12B.4 12B.5 12B.6 12B.7 12B.8 12B.9  Recall that natural plant compounds can contain active ingredients
used for medicinal purposes
 Describe how solvent extraction can be used to extract and purify
natural plant compounds for medicinal purposes
 Describe how distillation can be used to extract and purify natural
plant compounds for medicinal purposes
 Recall some common classes of organic medicines and the key
functional groups that characterise each class
 Explain why understanding how functional groups contribute to
the mechanism of action of medicines will help guide future drug
development
 Define ‘chiral centre’ and identify compounds that contain a chiral
centre
 Describe how chiral centres can result in isomers and enantiomers  Explain why the presence of isomers in compounds used as
medicines can cause problems
 Define the primary, secondary, tertiary and quaternary structures
of proteins
 Describe the interactions and bonding that are important for
the primary, secondary, tertiary and quaternary levels of protein
structure to form
 Recall that the function of an enzyme involves the binding of a
substrate to its active site
 Describe the lock-and-key model of enzyme function  Explain the effect of temperature changes, including denaturation,
on the rate of enzyme activity
 Explain the effect of changes in pH on the rate of enzyme activity  Define ‘zwitterion’ and explain how this forms in relation to
amino acids
 Explain the effect of a competitive inhibitor on the rate of enzyme
activity
 Describe how competitive inhibition can be used as a treatment
approach
11☐
1☐, 2☐, 13☐
3☐
12☐
14a☐, 14b☐
5☐, 14c☐, 15a☐
4☐, 15b☐, 15c☐
16☐
7☐
6☐
10☐, 17a☐
17b☐
8☐, 17c☐
8☐, 17c☐
18a☐, 18b☐
17d☐
9☐
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
491
Multiple-choice questions
1 The process of solvent extraction is primarily used for
A increasing the shelf life of medicines.
B synthesising new organic compounds.
C changing the physical properties of organic compounds.
D purifying natural and synthesised compounds.
2 What is the most important factor to consider when choosing a solvent for extraction?
A cost-effectiveness
B availability in the laboratory
C environmental sustainability
D solubility of the desired compound
3 What is the basis for separation in distillation?
A differences in solubilities
B differences in boiling points
C differences in molecular weights
D differences in chemical reactions
4 Enantiomers can have different biological activities. What is the primary reason for this
difference?
A Enantiomers have different physical states.
B Enantiomers have different functional groups.
C Enantiomers have different molecular weights.
D Enantiomers interact differently with chiral biological molecules.
5 Which of the following is true about chiral carbons in organic compounds?
A Chiral carbons can be found at any position within the carbon chain.
B Chiral carbons are always located in the middle of the carbon chain.
C A carbon bonded to four other carbon atoms cannot be chiral.
D Chiral carbons have one or more identical substituents.
6 Which levels of protein structure can involve hydrogen bonding?
A secondary only
B secondary and tertiary only
C secondary, tertiary and quaternary only
D primary, secondary, tertiary and quaternary
7 Which of the following statements regarding the levels of protein structure is false?
A The tertiary structure represents the overall three-dimensional shape of a single
polypeptide chain.
B Primary structure refers to the linear sequence of amino acids that make up a
polypeptide chain.
C Quaternary structure describes the interactions between multiple polypeptide chains.
D The secondary structure involves interactions between side chains of amino acids.
8 Which of the following statements accurately describes the effect of pH and temperature on
enzyme activity?
A Increasing temperature always leads to increased enzyme activity, while decreasing
temperature slows down enzyme reactions.
B Enzymes are unaffected by pH and temperature variations, as they can function under a
wide range of conditions.
C Increasing both pH and temperature can lead to loss of enzyme activity due to denaturation.
D Increasing pH generally enhances enzyme activity, while decreasing pH can denature enzymes.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
492
9 Competitive enzyme inhibitors may act as therapeutic agents because they
A reduce the activity of specific enzymes.
B enhance the activity of specific enzymes.
C promote the breakdown of specific substrates.
D increase the production of essential molecules.
10 Which of the following statements accurately describes the interaction between an enzyme and
its substrate?
A The substrate binds irreversibly to the enzyme’s active site.
B The substrate and enzyme undergo covalent bonding to form a new compound.
C The enzyme modifies the chemical structure of the substrate to enhance its reactivity.
D The enzyme and substrate form a temporary enzyme-substrate complex held together by
non-covalent interactions.
Short-answer questions
11 Provide one example of a natural compound used for medicinal purposes. 12 Provide an example of a class of organic medicines and identify one functional group
that is commonly shared throughout the class. 13 Imagine you are extracting a medicinal compound from a plant using a solvent
extraction process. Briefly explain the purpose of each of the following steps involved
in the extraction process.
a Plant material is ground into smaller pieces. b The ground plant material is mixed with a suitable solvent and left to soak for
a period of time. c The mixture is filtered. d The solvent extract is evaporated to remove the solvent. 14 Prednisolone, a member of a group of medicines called corticosteroids, is used for the
treatment of various inflammatory and autoimmune conditions. Answer the following
questions about prednisolone, referring to its structure shown below.
OH
CH3
O
(1 mark)
(2 marks)
(1 mark)
(1 mark)
(1 mark)
(1 mark)
HO
CH3
HO
H
O
a Identify three different functional groups, by writing their chemical elements and
general name, present in prednisolone. (3 marks)
b Identify three properties of prednisolone that may be affected if the functional
groups were modified. (3 marks)
c Determine the location and number of chiral carbons in prednisolone and explain
what makes a carbon atom chiral. (Hint: You might want to draw the full structural
formula for prednisolone to answer this.) (2 marks).
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
493
15 Consider the following structural isomers of pentanol.
A OH
B OH
A
D HO
B
C HO
C
a Determine the number of chiral carbons present in each structural isomer. D
(4 marks)
b Based on the presence of chiral carbons, determine whether each structural
isomer exists as a pair of enantiomers or not. Justify your answer. (2 marks)
c Explain how enantiomers differ in terms of their structural formula and spatial
arrangement. (2 marks)
16 An organic chemist successfully synthesises a pharmaceutical compound through a series
of reactions and purification steps. However, during chemical analysis, the presence of two
enantiomeric forms is detected in the purified product. Outline any challenges that this may
pose in the development and use of the drug.  (2 marks)
17 Enzymes are essential for accelerating chemical reactions in biological systems.
a Describe how enzymes facilitate and speed up chemical reactions within organisms.
 (2 marks)
b Explain the concept of the ‘lock-and-key’ model of enzyme activity. (3 marks)
c The denaturation of enzymes affects their activity.
i Define ‘denaturation’. (1 mark)
ii Identify and describe two possible causes of denaturation, highlighting the
mechanism through which denaturation occurs and the levels of protein
structure affected by denaturation. (6 marks)
d Define a ‘competitive inhibitor’ and describe its impact on the rate of enzyme activity.
 (3 marks)
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
494
18 As well as being affected by temperature, enzyme activity can also be affected by changes in pH.
The R groups of α-amino acids are important in helping to form the tertiary and quaternary
levels of enzyme structure. The charge of the R group can change due to changes in pH.
a Copy and complete the table below to outline the differences expected due to
pH changes in each of the α-amino acids. (3 marks)
α-amino acid (with
highlighted R group)
H3N+
H
C
C
CH
O
O–
Is R group neutral, or negatively or positively charged at each pH?
pH 3 pH 7 pH 12
OH
CH3
Threonine
H
H3N+ C
C
CH2
CH2
C
O– O
Glutamic acid
O
O–
H
H3N+ C
C
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH2
NH3+
Lysine
O
O–
b Which of the above α-amino acids is present as a zwitterion? Justify your answer
by explaining what a zwitterion is. (2 marks)
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
496
UNIT
4
HOW ARE CARBON-BASED COMPOUNDS DESIGNED
FOR PURPOSE?
CHAPTER
13
SCIENTIFIC INVESTIGATIONS
Introduction
Scientific investigation skills and understanding are fundamental to the daily work of a scientist.
As a component of your assessment for Units 3 and 4, you will be required to design an
investigation, generate primary data and report on the findings. The focus can be on content
from across Units 3 and/or 4 related to the production of energy or chemicals or the synthesis
or analysis of organic compounds. You will be required to conduct an investigation, followed by
the production of a scientific poster, as this is a key requirement for School-assessed Coursework
(SAC) in Unit 4. As many VCAA exam questions focus on practical understanding and skills, this is
also an opportunity for you to develop your knowledge and skills in this area.
This chapter outlines how to plan, conduct and present the results of a scientific investigation,
and provides useful tips and examples along the way. The digital resource contains additional
information about alternative formats for demonstrating your understanding of chemicals and
the analysis and synthesis of organic compounds, which may be used as the basis for different
assessments.
Curriculum
Area of Study 3 Outcome 3
How is scientific inquiry used to investigate the sustainable production of energy and/or materials?
Study Design: Learning intentions – at the end of the chapter I
will be able to:
Scientific evidence
•
Authentication of generated
primary data through the use
of a logbook
13A Investigative planning and design
13A.1  Document investigations appropriately using
a logbook
Investigation design
•
Chemical concepts specific
to the selected scientific
investigation and their
significance, including
definitions of key terms
13A.2  Define key terms related to scientific skills
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
Study Design: •
Characteristics of the selected
scientific methodology and
method, and appropriateness
of the use of independent,
dependent and controlled
variables in the selected
scientific investigation
Scientific evidence
•
The nature of evidence
that supports or refutes a
hypothesis, model or theory
Investigation design
•
The accuracy, precision,
repeatability, reproducibility,
resolution and validity of
measurements
•
The health, safety and ethical
guidelines relevant to the
selected scientific investigation
Investigation design
•
Techniques of primary
quantitative data generation
relevant to the selected
scientific investigation
•
The accuracy, precision,
repeatability, reproducibility,
resolution and validity of
measurements
Scientific evidence
•
Authentication of generated
primary data through the use
of a logbook
•
Ways of organising, analysing
and evaluating primary data
to identify patterns and
relationships, including sources
of error and uncertainty
497
Learning intentions – at the end of the chapter I
will be able to:
13A.3  Define ‘controlled experiment’
13A.4 13A.5  List the features that a controlled experiment includes
 Understand the meaning of single-variable
exploration
13A.6  Define and identify independent, dependent and
controlled variables
13A.7  Select and use the procedures and equipment
appropriate to an investigation
13A.8 13A.9  Distinguish between an aim and a hypothesis
 Construct aims and questions for investigations
13A.10  Formulate hypotheses and predict possible
outcomes based on models or theory
13A.11  Define ‘reproducibility’, ‘repeatability’ and ‘validity’,
and distinguish between these
13A.12  Design an investigation that is valid
13A.13  Design an experiment that is fully repeatable and
reproducible by others
13A.14  Determine potential ethical issues with
investigation design
13A.15  Identify how bias can be minimised in an
investigation
13A.16  Follow clear guidelines for health and safety when
undertaking practical investigations
13B  Scientific evidence
13B.1  Define ‘qualitative’ and ‘quantitative’
13B.2  Distinguish between qualitative and quantitative data
13B.3  Include appropriate units of measurement for
quantitative data
13B.4 13B.5 13B.6 13B.7 13B.8  Transform primary data into an appropriate format
of results (table, flow chart, bar and/or line graph)
 Identify trends in data
 Define the different types of errors (random and
systematic)
 Identify sources of error and outliers from
primary data
 Use evidence to determine whether an
investigation supports or discounts a hypothesis,
scientific model or theory
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
498
Study Design: Learning intentions – at the end of the chapter I
will be able to:
•
Assumptions and limitations
of investigation methodology
and/or data generation and/or
analysis methods
13B.9  Identify areas for improvement in investigation
design and analysis to increase accuracy and
precision and reduce the likelihood of errors
Science communication
•
Conventions of science
communication:
scientific terminology and
representations, symbols,
formulas, standard
abbreviations and units of
measurement
13C Scientific communication
13C.1  Appropriately communicate all aspects of a
scientific investigation
13C.2 13C.3  Apply correct abbreviations to chemical terminology
 Recall and convert between different units of
measurement in chemistry
13C.4  Determine the correct number of significant
figures to use in answers to questions
•
Conventions of scientific
poster presentation, including
succinct communication of the
selected scientific investigation,
and acknowledgements and
references
13C.5 13C.6  Know and demonstrate how scientific
investigations are presented succinctly on a poster
 Recall how and what to acknowledge and/or
reference in correct format
•
The key findings and
implications of the selected
scientific investigation
13C.7 13C.8  Justify conclusions and evaluate whether evidence
supports or refutes the hypothesis
 Interpret investigation outcomes in terms of
broader chemical concepts
VCE Chemistry Study Design extracts © VCAA; reproduced by permission.
Glossary
Aim
Accuracy
Conclusion
Continuous data
Controlled variable
Dependent variable
Discrete data
Hypothesis
Independent variable
Introduction
Line of best fit
Method
Outlier
Precision
Primary data
Qualitative data
Quantitative data
Random error
Reliability
Repeatability
Reproducibility
Resolution
Secondary data
Single-variable exploration
Systematic error
Title
True value
Validity
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
CONCEPT MAP
499
Concept map
13A Investigative planning and design
13B Scientific evidence
Structuring the logbook
– investigative design
Structuring the logbook
– scientific evidence
13C Scientific communication
See the Interactive Textbook for an interactive version of this
concept map interlinked with all concept maps for the course.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
500 CHAPTER 13 SCIENTIFIC INVESTIGATIONS
•
•
13A Investigative planning and design
Study Design:
Glossary:
Scientific evidence
Aim
•
Authentication of generated primary data
Controlled variable
through the use of a logbook
Dependent variable
The nature of evidence that supports or
Hypothesis
refutes a hypothesis, model or theory
Independent variable
Investigation design
Introduction
Chemical concepts specific to the selected
Method
scientific investigation and their significance,
Primary data
including definitions of key terms
Reliability
Characteristics of the selected scientific
Repeatability
methodology and method, and
Reproducibility
appropriateness of the use of independent,
Secondary data
dependent and controlled variables in the
Single-variable exploration
selected scientific investigation
Title
The accuracy, precision, repeatability,
Validity
reproducibility, resolution and validity of
measurements
The health, safety and ethical guidelines
relevant to the selected scientific
investigation
•
•
•
ENGAGE
Scientific breakthroughs
Scientists ask questions and plan investigations to learn more about the world around us
and help develop solutions for real-world problems. They work both individually and in
teams to share knowledge for the greater good of humans and the existence and survival
of many other species. If you consider the rapid rise in the production and generation of
new forms of energy across the last century, we have seen the following:
• The solar cell, which was the first device
able to convert light into electrical
energy by the photovoltaic effect, was
developed in 1954.
• The world’s first onshore wind farm
opened in the United States in 1980,
followed some 11 years later by the first
offshore wind farms in Denmark.
• The first commercial operating plant
for manufacturing biodiesel opened in
Austria in 1991.
• The Three Gorges Dam in China, which
Figure 13A–1 The Three Gorges Dam, the
world’s largest hydroelectric power plant
was the world’s largest hydroelectric
power plant, opened in 2012.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
13A INVESTIGATIVE PLANNING AND DESIGN
501
EXPLAIN
Structuring a logbook – investigative design
A logbook allows a scientist to keep track of the specific dates of their investigation ideas,
planning, questions, important results, errors and any modifications required, thereby
maintaining a record of all work and experimentation conducted. Information recorded
in a logbook is an original source of the information, written, processed or collected
by the experimenter(s) or researcher(s) themselves. In doing so, a clear record of all
information and data can be authenticated, meaning it is true or valid. A requirement of
the VCE is that each student must maintain a logbook of practical activities in Units 1–4
for assessment purposes. The need for a printed logbook, rather than an online or digital
logbook, removes the likelihood of any tampering with results. Of course, this will depend
on your school and your teacher’s authentication practices, so it is best to work within
your school’s guidelines.
Primary data refers to any data source that is obtained firsthand by a researcher for their
project. Primary data can be collected through many means, including experiments,
interviews and field observations. While more time-consuming and expensive than
collecting secondary data (already existing collected data), in many instances primary data
collection is the best suited for your research.
In this section, you will learn how to develop a logbook for your own practical investigation
and the importance of each section in contribution to the end report. This is usually in the
form of a practical report or scientific poster (outlined in Section 13C).
The best way to record an investigation in a logbook is demonstrated in the example below,
which shows two logbook entries written by different students:
• Investigation 1 is written by a student who has completed the task to a satisfactory
standard.
• Investigation 2 is written by a student who has completed the task to a very high
standard.
The investigation involved determining the effect of the addition of invertase on the
production of glucose, which can then be used as a reactant for the production of
bioethanol, a renewable fuel. The differences between Investigation 1 and Investigation 2,
as well as tips on what to include in each of the key sections, are included to assist you with
your own logbook development.
Primary data
sourced data
that is collected
firsthand by the
researcher for a
specific purpose;
commonly
collected
through
investigations,
observations,
interviews, field
work or surveys
LINK 13C SCIENTIFIC
COMMUNICATION
Secondary data
existing data
that is collected
and/or utilised
by someone
other than
the primary
investigator.
Common
examples
include
published
journal articles,
books or
websites
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
502 CHAPTER 13 SCIENTIFIC INVESTIGATIONS
Title
the research
question under
investigation;
includes
information about
what is being tested
1
2
Logbook
Title
Determine the effect of a catalyst on the rate of a chemical reaction.
Does the addition of invertase result in an increased rate of glucose
production through its function as a catalyst on the hydrolysis of
sucrose?
Introduction
a detailed,
but succinct,
explanation of
the reason for
undertaking the
investigation;
includes key
chemical concepts,
aim and hypothesis
1
Notes
The title should
include reference
to the variables
being changed
(independent
variable) and
measured (dependent
variable).
In the introduction
(to a poster) it can
also be appropriate
to present a labelled
diagram of the
concept/idea being
investigated.
2
Introduction
Enzymes are substances essential to help reactions proceed more
efficiently for these chemical reactions to actually occur. They are
made of key chemical elements, such as carbon, hydrogen, oxygen,
nitrogen and sulfur. Enzymes are specific to the substance that they
act on.
Enzymes are catalysts that increase the rate of chemical reactions
by lowering the activation energy for that reaction to occur by
providing an alternate reaction pathway. Invertase, the focus of
this investigation, is an enzyme present in plants and yeast that
catalyses the hydrolysis of sucrose into fructose and glucose.
Hydrolysis reactions involve the addition of water, as shown for this
reaction below:
sucrose + water → glucose + fructose
C12H22O11(aq) + H2O(l) → C6H12O6(aq) + C6H12O6(aq)
The progress of this reaction can therefore be measured by the
formation and concentration of glucose, determined using glucose
test strips. The more glucose present, the darker the colour
displayed on the test strip will be. This detects concentrations of
glucose between 0 mg mL–1 and 30 mg mL–1
.
Glucose produced in yeast and plants can be further broken down
with the aid of anaerobic bacteria to form ethanol (bioethanol) via
fermentation, according to the following chemical equation:
C6H12O6(aq) → 2C2H5OH(aq) + 2CO2(g)
Bioethanol as a fuel is a renewable source of energy that results in
less greenhouse gas emissions compared to fossil fuels.
Aim
the main purpose of
an investigation
1
2
Aim
To determine whether the presence of an enzyme increases the rate
of a chemical reaction.
To determine whether the presence of the enzyme invertase
increases the rate of hydrolysis of sucrose by measuring the
concentration of glucose produced using glucose test strips.
The aim includes
explicit reference to
the independent and
dependent variable.
This will be included
in your introduction
for the final scientific
poster presentation.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
Hypothesis
a prediction of
the outcomes,
which are testable
experimentally and
form the basis of
the methodology
1
2
Independent
variable
the variable for
which quantities
are changed by the
experimenter
1
2
Dependent variable
the variable that
changes in response
to changes in
the independent
variable; the
experimenter
measures these
changes
1
2
Controlled variable
anything kept
constant, or
monitored, so it
does not affect
the independent
and dependent
variables, and
therefore the
validity of
experimental results
1
2
WORKSHEET
13A–1
IDENTIFYING
VARIABLES
DOC
Method
a series of
numbered steps
describing the
procedure
1
13A INVESTIGATIVE PLANNING AND DESIGN
503
Hypothesis
The enzyme will increase the rate of reaction.
The presence of invertase will increase the rate of the hydrolysis
reaction of sucrose, producing an increased concentration
of glucose, when compared to the reaction occurring without
invertase. This will occur due to the ability of invertase to catalyse
the hydrolysis of sucrose by lowering the activation energy of the
reaction by providing an alternate reaction pathway.
Independent variable
The presence of the enzyme
The presence of invertase
Dependent variable
The hydrolysis of sucrose
The concentration of glucose produced at 40ºC over time as
detected with the use of glucose test strips
Controlled variables
Environmental conditions
Equipment
Invertase
Same initial concentration of sucrose (50.0 mg mL–1)
Same volume of sucrose added (3.00 mL)
Same initial concentration of invertase (5.0 x 10–2 mg mL–1)
Same volume of invertase added (3.00 mL)
Same temperature of all solutions (40.0ºC)
Method
1 Place sucrose into a test tube and incubate in water bath.
2 Add water to the test tube.
3 Allow the chemical reaction time to occur.
4 Measure the presence of glucose using glucose test strips to
confirm chemical reaction occurred.
5 Repeat steps 1–4 but add enzyme instead of water.
The hypothesis is a
prediction of what
you think will occur.
It does not have to
be correct but should
be supported by your
knowledge of the
theory, which is the
difference between
Investigations 1 and 2.
The independent
variable should be
specific and list all
quantities or changes
being investigated.
It should also list the
control group, if one
is included in the
investigation.
State how the
dependent variable
will be measured in
your experiment. This
will likely involve using
an instrument and
units of measurement.
There will always
be more than one
controlled variable in
any investigation. List
as many as you can
for your investigation.
The word ‘same’
is used for each
variable, to show that
the variables have
been kept constant,
and so the results
are valid.
The method must
contain enough
information for the
investigation to be
repeated by yourself
(repeatability) and
others (reproducibility).
Therefore it must
include specific
quantities of any
substances and specific
equipment used.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
504 CHAPTER 13 SCIENTIFIC INVESTIGATIONS
2
1  Six different test tubes were set up, each containing 3.00 mL of
50.0 mg mL–1 sucrose aqueous solution.
2 One of the test tubes was placed in a water bath at 40ºC for
30 seconds.
3 3.00 mL of distilled water was added to the test tube, the
stopwatch started and the solution was immediately tested
using a glucose test strip for the 0 second timepoint.
4 After 60 seconds, the solution from the test tube was tested
using the glucose test strips. This was repeated at the 120 s,
180 s, 240 s and 300 s timepoints.
5 Results were recorded in the results table.
6 Steps 2–5 were repeated a further two times and the average
across the three trials was recorded.
7 Steps 2–6 were repeated but with 3.00 mL of invertase solution
added instead of 3.00 mL of distilled water..
1
2
Health, safety and ethical considerations
Wearing of lab coat, safety glasses and gloves.
There are no ethical issues to consider.
For this experiment, wearing of personal protective equipment (lab
coat, safety glasses and gloves) is required.
While yeast is commonly found in nature on plant leaves, flowers,
fruits and in soil, the yeast from which the invertase was extracted
for this experiment was manufactured by a company that sells it to
commercial bread producers. Therefore, no plants or animals were
harmed in obtaining the yeast for this investigation. Therefore, this
choice of using the manufactured yeast in preference to a plant-
based yeast is the resolution for any potential ethical considerations
around the use of living organisms by chemists, general public and/or
consumers.
Some schools have
access to an online
risk assessment
program that
allows you to input
equipment and
any chemicals
specific to your own
investigation, which
generates safety
requirements to be
followed. With the use
of living organisms,
ethical integrity
when using data and
reporting on outcomes
should be clearly
considered and
outlined.
Repeatability
the ability to
produce the same
results when the
experiment is
repeated in one
lab by one operator
under the same
conditions
1
2
Repeatability
Repeat experiment three times to determine the effect of invertase
on the chemical reaction.
This experiment was conducted three times to increase the sample
size and ensure repeatability (or reliability) of results.
Without repeating
your experiment, your
results are potentially
valid but not reliable
(representative of
normal conditions).
It is important in any
investigation to have a
large sample size.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
13A INVESTIGATIVE PLANNING AND DESIGN
505
Reproducibility
when the same
results are obtained
for the same
experiment by
different operators
using different
equipment
1
2
Reliability
the extent to which
an experiment
always yields the
same results under
the same conditions
Reproducibility
Someone else repeats experiment three times to determine the
effect of invertase on the chemical reaction.
The experiment could be repeated by other investigators using
a different technique for measuring glucose concentrations or
a different concentration of invertase. Results could then be
compared based on the similarity of experimental set-up and aim of
the investigation.
Other experimenters
achieving the same
result as you after
conducting the same
investigation further
strengthens the
validity and reliability
of your results. It is
worth researching
if others have done
your experiment
previously, or getting
your peers to perform
your experiment using
your method, to see if
they achieve the same
results. It is important
not to confuse
reproducibility and
repeatability.
Validity
the extent to which
all variables in
the experiment
have been
controlled, so that
the independent
variable is the only
factor that changes
1
2
Single-variable
exploration
an investigation
that contains only
one independent
and one dependent
variable
Validity
All variables are controlled in the experiment, and therefore it is a
valid test.
This experiment contains one independent variable (the presence
of invertase) and one dependent variable (concentration of glucose
produced), where all other factors in the experimental design have
been controlled (same volume of invertase, same concentration and
volume of sucrose, same temperature of solutions). Hence, it is a
single-variable exploration.
It is crucial to ensure
that the independent
variable is the only
aspect changing in
your investigation
(single-variable
exploration), and
that all other variables
are controlled. If this
is not done or noted,
then it is impossible
to draw meaningful
conclusions from your
results.
13A SKILLS
Scientific methodologies
In this chapter, you have seen how the scientific investigation process is used to
establish facts or acquire knowledge. It involves formulating a hypothesis, collecting
data, analysing the data and drawing conclusions. These principle steps of the scientific
process can be applied across all disciplines of science; however, the specifics of each
step may change depending on the aim of the investigation and what is being examined.
In this ‘scientific skills’ section, you will learn about different scientific methodologies
that may be applied to investigations.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
506 CHAPTER 13 SCIENTIFIC INVESTIGATIONS
Classification and identification
Classification is the arrangement of phenomena, objects or events into groups or
categories based on their relationships. Identification involves allocating unidentified
objects to the correct category once a classification has been established.
Classification can involve a simple set of categories (for example, acids and bases) or can
be performed using a tree structure to show how some classes can be further divided
into more specific groups. For example, matter may be classified as follows:
Matter
Pure substance
Mixture
Element Compound
Homogeneous Heterogeneous
Observations from scientific investigations can be used to identify an unknown object
or event. Using the classifications examples above, we could make the following
identifications based on observations:
Observations Identification
•
•
Does not separate into components
Made up of more than one element
Compound
•
•
Liquid appears uniform
Separates into multiple components when
analysed by TLC
Homogeneous mixture
13B SCIENTIFIC
EVIDENCE
LINK
Think about some of the other classification systems in chemistry that you have come
across in Units 3 and 4.
Fieldwork
Fieldwork involves collecting data at a specific location, rather than in the
semi-controlled environment of a lab or classroom. Environmental chemists often
perform fieldwork, travelling to locations to collect and analyse samples to investigate
the effects that chemicals have on the air, water and soil.
The generation of site-specific data should be recorded in your logbook. An example of
a portion of a logbook entry for a fieldwork investigation is shown below. Section 13B
further explores how to present results of your investigations in your logbook.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
13A INVESTIGATIVE PLANNING AND DESIGN
507
Aim: To investigate the water quality of Lake Daylesford
Location: End of Lake Daylesford jetty
Date: 9/10/2022
Results:
Test Result Units
1. Temperature 12 °C
2.
pH 6.8 pH units
3. Dissolved oxygen 7.1 mg L−1
4. Total phosphates 0.4 mg L−1
5. Nitrates 8.9 mg L−1
6. Total solids 5.5 mg L−1
Modelling and simulation
Scientific modelling involves the construction of a physical, conceptual or mathematical
model, which represents a real phenomenon. Models provide a visual way of linking
theory with experiment and provide a way to explain or predict behaviour of objects or
systems. Simulation involves using a model to study the behaviour of a real or theoretical
system. Performing simulations can overcome experimental limitations; for example,
a system may be too complex, too large or small, too fast or slow, inaccessible or too
dangerous.
One model that you will have already come across is Bohr’s model of the structure of the
atom, which was primarily based on the emission spectrum of hydrogen.
An example of a simple mathematical model is shown below. In this investigation, a
student examined the relationship between volume and pressure using a gas syringe
and a pressure gauge. An inverse relationship between volume and pressure was
observed. Further analysis involved mathematical modelling of the data by fitting to a
linear function.
Pressure (atm)
3.50
3.00
2.50
2.00
1.50
1.00
0.50
0.00
Volume
(L)
1/Volume
(L–1)
Pressure
(atm)
11.0 0.09 0.50
5.20 0.19 1.00
3.80 0.26 1.50
2.60 0.38 2.00
2.22 0.45 2.50
1.85 0.54 3.00
0.00 0.20 0.40 0.60
1/Volume (L–1)
Based on the mathematical model determined, can you predict what the volume of the
system would be if the pressure is 0.75 atm?
Far more complicated models have been developed by scientists to identify and
understand patterns in our world. For example, mathematical models have been used to
simulate future temperature increases due to climate change.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
508 CHAPTER 13 SCIENTIFIC INVESTIGATIONS
Product, process or system development
Some scientific investigations involve the design of a product, process or system to meet
a particular need. This may involve technological applications in addition to scientific
knowledge and procedures.
You will have encountered many examples where scientific knowledge has been used to
generate a range of everyday products, such as:
• knowledge of measurement of pH to design kits for testing the acidity of swimming
pools and aquariums
• knowledge of removal of impurities from water to build industrial water treatment
and sewerage plants
• knowledge of redox reactions to generate batteries and power sources that produce
greener, cleaner energy.
Section 13A questions
1 What features does a controlled experiment include?
2 Define the following terms: independent variable, dependent variable, controlled
variable.
3 Compare validity and reliability.
4 Outline the difference between repeatability and reproducibility.
5 Explain what single-variable exploration means.
6 When aqueous hydrogen peroxide, H2O2, is heated, it decomposes, resulting in the
production of both water and oxygen as per the chemical equation below:
2H2O2(aq) → 2H2O(l) + O2(g)
This decomposition reaction can also occur at SLC if a catalyst, such as manganese(IV)
oxide or lead(IV) oxide, is added. Both of these catalysts are poisonous if ingested or
inhaled and can also cause skin irritation.
A chemist is given a 0.500 M solution of hydrogen peroxide and a syringe with a 100 mL
capacity and is planning to investigate the effects of adding manganese(IV) oxide on the
rate of reaction.
a Write a suitable aim for this investigation.
b Identify the independent and dependent variables in this investigation.
c Draw a fully labelled diagram of the set-up, including all equipment to be used, to
ensure that no oxygen could be lost when the investigation was conducted.
d Determine two features of a catalyst that would need to be controlled in this
investigation.
e List and justify two safety precautions that need to be carried out when conducting
this investigation.
f Describe what the chemist would need to measure to achieve the desired aim from
your answer to part a above.
g Determine one aspect of this investigation that would potentially influence its
repeatability. Justify your response.
7 The material safety data sheet (MSDS) for an organic powder includes the following
precaution:
‘Warning! This substance causes skin, eye and respiratory irritation.’
a Identify three pieces of personal protective equipment (PPE) that should be used by
students conducting an experiment using this powder.
b Justify the need for each of the PPE items in your answer to part a above.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
13B SCIENTIFIC EVIDENCE
509
Scientific evidence
13B
Study Design:
Investigation design
•
Techniques of primary quantitative data generation
relevant to the selected scientific investigation
•
The accuracy, precision, repeatability, reproducibility,
resolution and validity of measurements
Scientific evidence
•
Authentication of generated primary data through the use
of a logbook
•
Ways of organising, analysing and evaluating primary data
to identify patterns and relationships, including sources of
error and uncertainty
•
Assumptions and limitations of investigation methodology
and/or data generation and/or analysis methods
Glossary:
Accuracy
Conclusion
Continuous data
Discrete data
Line of best fit
Outlier
Precision
Qualitative data
Quantitative data
Random error
Resolution
Systematic error
True value
EXPLAIN
Structuring a logbook – scientific evidence
This section discusses how to represent the results of your investigation in your logbook,
including: drawing up tables and graphs, analysing the data collected, commenting on any
errors, ensuring the precision and accuracy of the data, and noting areas for improvement.
Before recording your results, it is important to understand the difference between
qualitative data and quantitative data. Qualitative data is descriptive – this means it is in the
form of words, not numbers. For example, it could be the appearance of something (for
example, ‘cloudy’ or ‘clear’) or colour (for example, ‘red’ or ‘yellow’). Quantitative data is
numerical – this means it is in the form of numbers, based on counting or measuring. For
example, it could be volume (for example, 25 mL) or pH recorded on a scale of 0 to 14.
Knowing this difference is important when determining what type of graph should be used
to represent the data you have generated.
When collecting quantitative data using measuring equipment or devices, it is important
to also consider the resolution of this data. Resolution refers to the smallest change in
the quantity being recorded that results in a noticeable change in the value shown on
the measuring equipment. For example, if the gas syringe shown in Figure 13B–1 has a
resolution of 1.0 mL and is used to record the volume of carbon dioxide gas produced, then
the experimenter can only estimate the volume between the two marked intervals on the
syringe. It is accepted that with graduations like this, an estimate to the nearest 0.1 mL
can be made. This means that a data reading of 11.1 mL or 11.7 mL is possible, but a
reading of 11.15 mL would not be possible. Alternatively, if you were using the burette
shown in Figure 13B–1, where the resolution is 0.1 mL, then the experimenter can estimate
the volume to the nearest 0.01 mL. For example, a volume recorded could be 40.51 mL or
40.73 mL.
Qualitative data
data that is
descriptive (not
numeric)
Quantitative
data
data that is
measured and
represented
numerically
Resolution
the smallest
change in the
quantity being
measured
that results in
a noticeable
change in the
value shown
on the piece
of measuring
equipment
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
510 CHAPTER 13 SCIENTIFIC INVESTIGATIONS
Consequently, when recording primary data – that is, data collected firsthand by the
experimenter in their results table – the number of decimal places recorded is dependent
on the instrumentation used.
Graduated gas syringe
5 10 15 20 25 30
mL
Figure 13B–1 Different pieces of equipment will have different resolutions, depending
on their graduated markings. The gas syringe (left) has markings every 1 mL and
therefore has a resolution of 1.0 mL, whereas a section of the burette (right) has
markings every 0.1 mL and therefore has a resolution of 0.10 mL. Instruments such as
these affect the number of decimal places data can be recorded to.
Results – table
1
Glucose concentration
1 min 2 min 3 min 4 min 5 min
Without
enzyme
0 1 1.5 3 3
With
enzyme
6.5 10 20 20 20
2
Title: Concentration of glucose produced from the hydrolysis of
sucrose over time without the presence of invertase.
Results – table
Time after
reaction
started (s)
Concentration of glucose produced recorded
using glucose test strips (mg mL–1)
Trial 1 Trial 2 Trial 3 Average
A results table
should include a title
with both variables
(independent
and dependent)
mentioned.
All columns/rows
must be labelled
with an appropriate
heading and relevant
units. It is good to
include an average,
or a percentage, from
multiple repeats. The
table can be drawn
by hand or generated
digitally.
0.0 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
60 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
120 1.00 1.50 1.00 1.20
180 1.00 1.50 1.50 1.30
240 3.00 3.00 3.00 3.00
300 3.00 6.50 3.00 4.20
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
WORKSHEET
13B–1
REPRESENTING
DATA
1
DOC
Discrete data
data that is
countable and in
discrete categories;
contains distinct
or separate values;
best represented by
a bar graph
Continuous data
data that is
measurable and
continuous, with
infinite possible
values; best
represented by a
line graph
2
13B SCIENTIFIC EVIDENCE
511
Title: Concentration of glucose produced from the hydrolysis of
sucrose over time in the presence of invertase.
Time after
reaction
started (s)
Concentration of glucose produced recorded
using glucose test strips (mg mL–1)
Trial 1 Trial 2 Trial 3 Average
0.0 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
60 10.0 6.50 6.50 7.70
120 20.0 10.0 10.0 13.3
180 20.0 20.0 20.0 20.0
240 20.0 20.0 20.0 20.0
300 20.0 20.0 20.0 20.0
Results – graph
25
Glucose concentration (mg mL–1)
20
15
10
5
0
Results – graph
25
Glucose concentration (mg mL–1)
20
15
10
5
0
Without enzyme With enzyme
60 120 180
240 300
Time (s)
Without invertase With invertase
Graphs should
include a main title
and have both x- and
y-axes labelled with
units (if required).
The x-axis is for the
independent variable
and the y-axis is
for the dependent
variable.
The correct type of
graph must be used.
Discrete data (based
on counting), should
be represented as a
bar graph. If data is
continuous (based
on measuring,
for example,
changing time,
temperature, volume,
concentration, pH),
the data should be
represented as a
line graph.
0 60 120 180 240 300
Time (s)
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
512 CHAPTER 13 SCIENTIFIC INVESTIGATIONS
Accuracy
how close the
measurements are
to the ‘true’ value of
the quantity being
measured
True value
the value or range
of values that would
be obtained if the
quantity could be
measured perfectly
1
2
Accuracy
This experiment is accurate, as data was generated using correct
experimental procedure.
To fully determine the accuracy of this experiment, the
experimentally achieved results for the concentration of glucose
as measured by the glucose test strips would need to be compared
to the concentration of glucose measured with a more accurate
technique. As it stands, no conclusion can be drawn about the
accuracy of the experiment.
Systematic error
when the readings
obtained from
measurements
differ from the
‘true’ value
consistently in one
direction every time
1
2
Systematic errors
For each test tube for which the concentration of glucose produced
was recorded, the measurements were compared to a set value on
the test strips so was only an approximate value.
The most likely source of systematic error in the experiment
may result from the colour of the glucose test strip incorrectly
corresponding to the glucose concentration. To minimise the chance
of this, the glucose test strips could be first calibrated against a
series of standards that contain known concentrations of glucose.
This should be done across the range of detection of the test strips,
which is 0 mg mL–1 to 30 mg mL–1
.
Random error
an unpredictable
variation in the
readings obtained
due to variables not
all being controlled
(extraneous
variables), resulting
in the readings
being higher or
lower than expected
1
2
Random errors
There were no random errors because the experiment was only
conducted once for each condition tested.
Random errors would be associated with all of the measurements
in this experiment, such as the added volumes of sucrose solution
and invertase solution, the timepoints that measurements were
taken at and the reading of the glucose test strips. Repeating and
averaging helps minimise the impact of these random errors..
Outlier
a reading that
is very different
from other results
obtained for the
same measurement
The accuracy of
an experiment is
not always known.
It depends on
how unique your
investigation is. Most
experiments you
perform will have
been completed by
others previously,
so you are just
reproducing results.
In those cases, a true
value is known and
you can compare
your own results
to it.
A systematic error
cannot be improved
by repeating
measurements, having
a larger sample size or
taking a mean. As the
results are always out
by a consistent value,
they will always be
inaccurate. Therefore,
a change in the
method or equipment
must occur in order to
eliminate the error.
The effect of a
random error can be
reduced by repeating
measurements,
having a larger sample
size and/or finding
the mean. As results
are equally likely to be
high or low, averaging
can improve the
precision of results.
For most experiments
in a laboratory where
multiple trials are
conducted, you will
need to account
for the effect of
these errors on
your investigation.
You may need to
also account for
outliers by repeating
measurements.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
13B SCIENTIFIC EVIDENCE
513
Precision
how close all the
measurements are
to each other
1
2
Precision
The results were not precise as the amount of glucose produced was
only recorded once for each experimental condition.
The precision of this experiment is likely limited by the glucose test
strips, which just have five reference colours corresponding to five
different glucose concentrations. A more precise way of measuring
glucose concentration might be to use a glucometer, which has a
numerical display.
Precision can be
improved by selecting
more precise
measuring tools for
your experiment. In
many cases, this will
mean measuring tools
that allow a number
to be reported to
more significant
figures. With more
precise measuring
tools, repeated
measurements will be
closer together.
Discussion
The discussion is the most crucial aspect of the investigation. Use your logbook to write
down any notes about what you plan to address in this section. The discussion should
include the following key content.
• Interpret and evaluate the trends and patterns in your data. It is important here to also
quote relevant data from the table/graph when referring to trends in the data.
• Acknowledge any deviations (outliers) in the data from the results that were expected.
Relate the results to the relevant chemistry or scientific theory and key terms. This is
very important, as this outlines how well you understand your results and can interpret
them based on your knowledge of the theory. Therefore, use the knowledge in previous
chapters of this text to help with the topic you are investigating.
• State whether the data you collected supports or doesn’t support the hypothesis.
• Identify any limitations in the data or the method. Refer to random and systematic
errors, and accuracy and precision, as discussed earlier in this chapter.
• Suggest future improvements to the investigation if it were to be performed again. This
means referring to experimental errors, not human errors (for example, incorrect
measuring of volume or not calibrating electronic balances). If your experiment is
performed correctly, there should be no human errors.
NOTE
Avoid terms such as ‘proved’, ‘disproved’, ‘correct’ and ‘incorrect’ in relation to your hypothesis,
as it is unlikely that you can be this certain from a single investigation. Instead use terms
such as ‘supported’, ‘not supported’, ‘indicated’ and ‘suggested’. If your results contradict your
predictions, this would warrant repeating the experiment, if you have time. If you cannot repeat
the experiment, then your report should include a discussion of flaws in the design or method,
and suggestions for how the investigation could be altered to minimise or eliminate these. Conclusion
The main purpose of the conclusion is to briefly summarise the position of the experiment
in the wider understanding of the chemistry topic(s). You need to state the important
overall trend of the data (referring specifically to data from your results) and whether or not
the results support the tested hypothesis. The conclusion should assess whether the results
Conclusion
a summary of
what you can
deduce from the
results of the
investigation,
including
whether
the tested
hypothesis was
supported
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
514 CHAPTER 13 SCIENTIFIC INVESTIGATIONS
of the experiment have contributed new information to what is known about the topic, and
any further investigations that need to be undertaken. The conclusion should not introduce
any information that has not already been discussed in the results and discussion sections.
For example, in the experiment described in this chapter, the conclusion might read
like this:
In conclusion, the results indicate that the presence of invertase increased the rate of
the hydrolysis of sucrose from _______ to ________. As such, the results support the
hypothesis.
Investigation extension
Sometimes, your practical investigation needs to include a possible extension. This should
be based directly on your results with a view to what could be tested further. It should
either focus on the same independent variable with more variations tested to provide a
more detailed set of results, or a different independent variable that will add value and
further clarification to your initial question. Ultimately, it should have specific reference to
real-world applications, green chemistry principles or sustainability goals.
In the experiment presented in this chapter, it was mentioned that systematic errors and
the lack of precision could both be attributed to the use of glucose test strips. To improve
the experiment, a calibrated glucometer could be employed, allowing for more precise
measurements to be made.
Check-in questions – Set 1
1 What is the difference between qualitative data and quantitative data?
2 What is the appropriate method of representing continuous data?
3 Compare random and systematic errors, including what results from each type of error.
4 What is the difference between accuracy and precision?
13B SKILLS
VIDEO 13B–1
SKILLS:
RECORDING
RESULTS IN A
TABLE
When completing work within this
‘scientific skills’ section, you will draw
upon some very important skills. Many
of these you will have learned in previous
years of studying science, but it is
particularly important to highlight some
here, to ensure that you maximise your
performance on any given assessment.
Recording results in a table
When constructing and recording your results in a table:
• Rule the table in pencil, so any amendments can be made easily.
• Give each column a clear heading, including both the quantity and the unit in which
it is measured. Do not enter the units in the table along with each numerical
value – the units go in the heading only.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
13B SCIENTIFIC EVIDENCE
515
• The independent variable is usually placed in the first column, with the dependent
variable to follow in the other columns.
• Organise the results appropriately. For example, if your experiment involved testing
an increasing concentration of a solute solution, your results should start with the
lowest concentration and continue to the highest concentration.
• If recording quantitative results, all values should have the same number of
decimal points.
• Include results for all repeats in the table and the mean (average) calculated for these.
• Any results that are outliers should be recorded again (repeat the measurement). If
there is no time to repeat the experiment, include the outliers but ignore them when
calculating the mean.
• Give the table an overall title. This should include mention of both the independent
and dependent variables.
• In most cases, data from a table also need to be displayed as a graph: a line graph for
continuous data, a bar graph for discrete data.
Concentration
Initial mass of 10 potato discs (g)
of solution
Trial 1 Trial 2 %
0.0 M 2 3.31 +10
0.8 M 2.05 2.13 +4
0.4 M 2.08 1.97 –4
0.2 M 2.05 1.95 –5
0.6 M 2 2 –5
Effect of increasing solution concentration on mass
of potato disc
Column has
no units;
heading only
Title of table
missing
Column has
no heading;
units only
Values not
in increasing
order
No mean
calculated
for the two
repeats
Results do
not all have
the same
number
of decimal
places
Concentration
of solution (M)
Initial mass of 10 potato discs (g)
Trial 1 Trial 2 Mean
0.0 2.00 3.31 2.00
0.2 2.05 1.95 2.00
0.4 2.08 1.97 2.03
0.6 2.00 2.00 2.00
0.8 2.05 2.13 2.09
This result
(3.31) does
not seem to
match the
others, so it
is a potential
outlier.
(Therefore,
in the correct
table below,
it is not
included in
the mean of
the two trials.)
The top table lacks ruled lines, and there are errors in the representation of data. A
corrected version is shown in the table below it.
Drawing graphs
When constructing a graph:
• Use pencil, as this will allow you to make any amendments easily.
• Put the independent variable on the x-axis (horizontal axis) and the dependent
variable on the y-axis (vertical axis).
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
516 CHAPTER 13 SCIENTIFIC INVESTIGATIONS
Line of best fit
a line on a graph
that shows the
general trend of
the data points;
the distance
to the points
above the line
should equal the
distance to the
points below the
line
• Fully label both axes and include units (units should be the same as the results table if
headings are correct there).
• The scale on the axes should have increasing values spaced at equal intervals, and it
should be easy to read values between these intervals. Do not extend the scales too
far beyond the recorded data values. Note: You do not have to begin your scale at 0.
• Make the graph as large as possible, so it is easy to read precise values.
When drawing scatter plots:
• Use a scatter plot to represent continuous data.
• Plot data points as crosses (×) or dots (•). If using dots, be sure to draw them large
enough so that they are not covered by the line drawn in the next step.
• Draw a line of best fit. This does not need to go through the first and last point, nor
does it need to be a straight line (both common mistakes made by students).
• If constructing your line of best fit digitally, software will have functions that allow
you to select ‘line of best fit’ when plotting data. If constructing this by hand, you
will need to do this by eye, which can be quite difficult. The line can be linear or
nonlinear. Your aim here is to ensure that if you were to measure the distance
between the data points below the line of best fit and the line itself, they would be
equal to the distance between the data points above the line of best fit and the line
itself. As you are unlikely to get this perfect on your first attempt, it is crucial you
draw this line of best fit in pencil (as you should for all graphs anyway!).
Scatter plot
0.6
0.5
VIDEO 13B–2
DRAWING
GRAPHS
Dependent variable (units)
0.4
0.3
Line of best fit
drawn through
the recorded
data points
0.2
0.1
0
0
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
Independent variable (units)
When drawing bar graphs:
• Use a bar graph to represent discrete data, and draw the bars with gaps
between them.
• However, for a histogram, a special type of bar graph showing the distribution of
numerical data, the rules are different. It displays the frequency of values on the
vertical axis that fall into defined ranges called ‘bins’ marked on the horizontal axis.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
13B SCIENTIFIC EVIDENCE
517
Bar graph
4.0
Dependent variable (units)
3.0
2.0
1.0
0
Independent variable (units)
Ordering your discussion
When choosing an order for all the points to talk about in your discussion, follow this
sequence.
1 Describe the overall trend (overall relationship between the independent and
dependent variable).
2 Describe any changes in the gradient of the graph, particularly focusing on sharp
changes and where they occur.
3 Quote data from the graph.
4 Explain the results using your scientific knowledge of the key concepts studied in
your investigation.
5 Identify sources of errors in the experiment. Begin this section with any systematic
errors and how these affected the accuracy of your measurements due to limitations
in the apparatus, experimental technique or experimental design. Do not include
human errors (for example, incorrectly measuring an exact volume of solution).
Then identify any random errors and how these affected the precision of your
measurements.
6 Identify areas for improvement. Focus on how to reduce the errors mentioned in
step 5. This could include things such as:
■ using better techniques for measuring the dependent variable
■ using equipment that is more likely to keep controlled variables constant and
therefore make your data valid, as well as more precise and accurate
■ repeating the investigation to increase reliability.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
518 CHAPTER 13 SCIENTIFIC INVESTIGATIONS
Section 13B questions
1 A year 12 student is designing a practical investigation based on the question:
‘How does half-cell concentration affect the potential difference of galvanic cells?’
a For this investigation, identify at least four concepts that would be important for a
student to include in their introduction to their research report.
b Sketch a potential results table the student would need to set up to collect their
results.
c For this investigation, how should the student
present their results graphically? Explain.
d Using your knowledge of how a voltmeter
works, determine the resolution of the
instrument shown on the right. Explain your
answer, including defining what resolution is.
e If the student is using this voltmeter and
has recorded the reading shown for one of
their trials of varying concentrations of the
half-cells, determine one random and one
systematic error that may have occurred.
2 The specific heat capacity of a substance is a
measure of the amount of energy required to raise
the temperature of one gram of a substance by one degree Celsius. Different substances
have different specific heat capacities. Specific heat capacity can be determined using the
following equation:
c = q
m∆T
where c is the specific heat capacity (measured in J g–1°C–1), q is the energy (measured
in joules, J), m is the mass (measured in grams, g) and ∆T is the change in temperature
(measured in °C).
A trio of students planned to measure the specific heat capacity of four different
substances – water, ethanol, sand and iron.
The internationally accepted values for the specific heat capacity of these substances are:
water = 4.18 J g–1°C–1
ethanol = 2.46 J g–1
°C–1
sand = 0.830 J g–1
°C–1
iron = 0.450 J g–1
°C–1
The students completed five trials with one of their samples, recording the following
results.
Trial Calculated specific heat capacity (J g–1
ºC–1)
1 0.460
2 0.455
3 0.458
4 0.460
5 0.462
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
13B SCIENTIFIC EVIDENCE
519
a Determine the average calculated specific heat capacity from the trials recorded in
the table.
b Based on the average from your answer to part a, what is the likely substance from
the four the students were testing?
c Using your determination of the substance in part b above, discuss both the precision
and accuracy of the students’ results.
d The students later suspected that the digital scales they were using to record the mass
of the sample was not previously calibrated with a substance of known mass. They
predicted that the mass reading was incorrect and underestimated the actual value.
Would this be classified as a systematic, random or human error? Justify your answer.
e For this experimental investigation, identify the independent and dependent
variables.
3 A chemistry class was committed to determining the concentration of a specific
compound in a mixture of substances using high-performance liquid chromatography
(HPLC). The class ran four standard solutions containing different concentrations of the
substance under identical conditions. The areas under the peak were measured from the
chromatogram and are shown in the table below.
Standard solution (ppm) Peak area
0.00 20
0.20 1000
0.40 2040
0.50 2950
1.00 6100
a Use the data in the table above to graph the calibration curve for the specific
compound’s standard solutions. Be sure to label your axes correctly and carefully plot
the data.
b Are the results collected by the class to generate the calibration curve from the
different standard solution concentrations repeatable or reproducible? Comment on
each of these.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
520 CHAPTER 13 SCIENTIFIC INVESTIGATIONS
Scientific communication
13C
Study Design:
Science communication
•
Conventions of science communication: scientific terminology and
representations, symbols, formulas, standard abbreviations and units of
measurement
•
Conventions of scientific poster presentation, including succinct
communication of the selected scientific investigation, and acknowledgements
and references
•
The key findings and implications of the selected scientific investigation
ENGAGE
Communicating your work
Think about how you’ve presented your
experimental work in science in previous years.
You would have written up your planning stages
and presented your results in a typical scientific
report. These types of scientific report are
similar to journal articles, which are a common
format that researchers use to publish their
work for peers. However, when they want to
share their research at conferences, scientists
often communicate their findings in the form of
a scientific poster. This type of format requires
scientists to be able to communicate their ideas
in a way that is clear, concise and engaging.
Producing a scientific poster involves developing
skills and is not easy. It often requires a lot of
thought and preparation.
Figure 13C–1 A poster session at a
General Meeting of the American
Society for Microbiology.
EXPLAIN
Scientific poster template
A key part of the School-assessed Coursework in Units 3 & 4 Chemistry is a student-designed
practical investigation presented in the format of a poster, using the following template:
Title
Student name
Introduction
Methodology and methods
Results
Communication statement
reporting the key finding of
the investigation as a one-
sentence summary
Discussion
Conclusion
References and acknowledgements
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
13C SCIENTIFIC COMMUNICATION
521
This template is the same as the one provided in the VCAA Chemistry Study Design.
You’ll notice from the template that the heading of each section correlates closely with
the information that is recorded in your logbook from Sections 13A and 13B. This should
highlight the importance of the way the information is structured in your logbook. The
VCAA has stipulated that the poster should not exceed 600 words, meaning that you may
have to summarise the information from your logbook in a more succinct fashion. The
communication statement occupies approximately one quarter of the page and needs to
be one sentence summarising the main outcomes of your investigation. This should be
engaging to encourage any reader to want to read the other sections of your poster.
While the aim and hypothesis aren’t specifically mentioned in the template, they are often
included in the introduction, following a brief explanation of the reasons for conducting
your investigation, and link to the relevant chemical concepts. The rubric provided by your
school will likely give more information about what should be included in your introduction
and the other sections of the poster.
References and acknowledgements
In the poster, you should include the sources of information (references) that you used
when planning and conducting the investigation. You can also acknowledge those who
supported your investigation, such as peers and your teacher.
A bibliography, or reference list, appears at the bottom of your poster and contains items
that you have directly referenced in your investigation. If you are referencing a website, the
reference must include the URL and the date on which the website was accessed.
There are a few common formats used for referencing sources of information. This
textbook will focus on the Harvard referencing format.
Reference lists
All sources cited in text, such as in the introduction section of a scientific poster, must be
included in the reference list. References should be listed in alphabetical order by author
surname or organisation name. There are very specific formatting rules for reference lists, and
different source materials require different details. In general, four elements are included in
a reference: author, date, title and source. The examples below show a reference entry for a
journal article, a book and a website. For more examples and explanations of how to reference
other sources, such as Wikipedia, organisational reports, films, YouTube clips, TED talks and
podcasts, a referencing quick guide is provided in the Interactive Textbook.
Periodical (journal, magazine or newspaper article; print or online)
LINK
LINK
13A
INVESTIGATIVE
PLANNING AND
DESIGN
13B SCIENTIFIC
EVIDENCE
VIDEO 13C–1
SCIENTIFIC
POSTER
EXAMPLE
DOC
DOCUMENT
13C–1
APA-STYLE
REFERENCING
 Author(s) surname and
first initials
 Date of publication
• in round brackets
• year only for journal article
 • full date for magazine article


 Article title
 • in sentence case
Jamil, R., Tomé, L. C., Mecerreyes, D., & Silvester, D. S. (2021).
Emerging ionic polymers for CO2 conversion to cyclic carbonates: an
overview of recent developments. Australian Journal of Chemistry, 74(11),
767–777. https://doi.org/10.1071/CH21182
 Page range or article number
 • page range written as x–x
 •  article number written as
Article xxxx
 DOI or URL
 •  doi written as
https://doi.org/xxxxx
 •  URL written as
https://xxxxx
 Periodical title
 • in italics
•
 every major word
starting with a
capital letter
 Volume number
 • 
in italics
 Issue number
 •  in round brackets,
no italics

ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
522 CHAPTER 13 SCIENTIFIC INVESTIGATIONS
Book
Author(s) surname
and first initials
Year of publication
• in round brackets
Drummond, B., Maaser, S., Angley, L., Greaves, R., Fraser, S., Lucas,
T., & Wang, Z. (2023). Cambridge Chemistry VCE Units 1 & 2.
Cambridge University Press.
Publisher:
•  every major word starting with a
capital letter
Book title
• in sentence case
Edition number if other than first edition
• in round brackets
• written as (2nd ed.).
Website
Author surname and first
initials or name of group
Date of publication
• in round brackets
Title of work
• in italics
• in sentence case
United Nations. (2022). The 17 goals | Sustainable development.
https://sdgs.un.org/goals, accessed 27 October 2023
Website name goes before URL if
different from author – here website
and author are same, so omitted
URL
Date of access
•  written as accessed
Day Month Year
• written as https://xxxxx
13C SKILLS
Validity and reliability of information
When completing your background planning for your practical investigation to
complete your introduction, you should use sources of information that are reputable.
To determine if a source is reputable, a number of factors must be considered.
1 Author credentials: A reputable source should have a clear and identifiable author
or group of authors. In the case of scientific information, this would typically be a
scientist or a group of researchers who are experts in the field they’re writing about.
The authors’ credentials, affiliations and academic backgrounds should be available,
showing that they have the necessary knowledge and expertise to be considered
trustworthy on the subject.
2 Citations and references: Reputable sources usually have a list of references or
citations at the end. These references indicate that the authors have done a compre-
hensive review of existing literature on the topic and are acknowledging the work of
other scientists where it is due.
3 Publication date: In science, recent sources can often be more reliable because they
account for the latest research and advancements in the field. This is not to say older
sources cannot be reputable, but it's always important to check the timeliness of the
source.
4 Objective and unbiased: Good scientific writing should always be objective, mean-
ing it should present the facts without bias or personal opinion. If a source seems to
be pushing a certain viewpoint without providing evidence or seems overly biased, it
might not be the most reliable.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
13C SCIENTIFIC COMMUNICATION
523
5 Supported by evidence: Reputable sources should always back up their claims with
empirical evidence, such as data, results from experiments or references to other
scientific research.
Plagiarism and referencing
Plagiarism is where you directly use
another author’s writing or images without
acknowledging them. Even if you‘re
paraphrasing pieces of information or
changing it into your own words, it is still
important to include a reference as to where
you sourced this information.
This is why as you source information, you
must ensure that you record (reference)
accurately the sources you have read and
Figure 13C–2 Plagarism involves passing
accessed for information. Referencing is
someone else’s work off as your own.
necessary to avoid plagiarism. Remember, your final written investigation will be a form
of secondary source, and if your reader is interested in finding out more about your
question, they may want to locate the primary source.
Section 13C questions
1 Where should you draw information from to complete your scientific poster?
2 What is included in the introduction section of the scientific poster?
3 What are the key sections of a scientific poster?
4 What is the purpose of the communicating statement in the centre of the poster?
5 What are some other ways of presenting the results of an investigation in chemistry and,
in general, to the scientific community?
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
524
Chapter 13 review
Summary
Create your own set of summary notes for this chapter, on paper or in a digital document. A model
summary is provided in the Teacher Resources and can be used to compare with yours.
Checklist
In the Interactive Textbook, the success criteria are linked from the review questions and will be
automatically ticked when answers are correct. Alternatively, print or photocopy this page and tick
the boxes when you have answered the corresponding questions correctly.
Success criteria – I am now able to: Linked questions
13A.1 Document investigations appropriately using a logbook 13A.2 Define key terms related to scientific skills 13A.3 Define ‘controlled experiment’ 13☐
13A.4 List the features that a controlled experiment includes 13A.5 Understand the meaning of single-variable exploration 13A.6 Define and identify independent, dependent and controlled
11☐
12☐
12☐
1☐
7☐, 12☐, 13☐
variables
13A.7 Select and use the procedures and equipment appropriate to an
5☐, 12☐, 13☐
investigation
13A.8 Distinguish between an aim and a hypothesis 13A.9 Construct aims and questions for investigations 13A.10 Formulate hypotheses and predict possible outcomes based on
10☐
12☐
12☐
models or theory
13A.11 Define ‘reproducibility’, ‘repeatability’, ‘resolution’ and ‘validity’, and
6☐, 8☐, 13☐
distinguish between these
13A.12 Design an investigation that accounts for accuracy and precision
2☐, 12☐
and is valid
13A.13 Design an experiment that is fully repeatable and reproducible
12☐
by others
13A.14 Determine potential ethical issues with investigation design 13A.15 Identify how bias can be minimised in an investigation 13A.16 Follow clear guidelines for health and safety when undertaking
12☐
16☐
5☐, 12☐
practical investigations
13B.1 Define ‘qualitative’ and ‘quantitative’ 13B.2 Distinguish between qualitative and quantitative data 13B.3 Include appropriate units of measurement for quantitative data 13B.4 Transform primary data into an appropriate format of results
13☐
4☐, 13☐
13☐
9☐, 12☐
(table, flow chart, bar and/or line graph)
13B.5 Identify trends in data 13B.6 Define the different types of errors (random and systematic) 12☐
12☐, 13☐
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
525
Success criteria – I am now able to: Linked questions
13B.7 13B.8 Identify sources of error and outliers from primary data Use evidence to determine whether an investigation supports or
discounts a hypothesis, scientific model or theory
13B.9 Identify areas for improvement in investigation design and analysis
to increase accuracy and precision and reduce the likelihood of
errors
13C.1 13C.3 Appropriately communicate all aspects of a scientific investigation 13C.2 Apply correct abbreviations to chemical terminology Recall and convert between different units of measurement in
chemistry
13C.4 Determine the correct number of significant figures to use in
answers to questions
13C.5 Know and demonstrate how scientific investigations are presented
succinctly on a poster
13C.6 Recall how and what to acknowledge and/or reference in correct
format
13C.7 Justify conclusions and evaluate whether evidence supports or
refutes the hypothesis
13C.8 Interpret investigation outcomes in terms of broader chemical
concepts
3☐, 12☐
12☐, 15☐
12☐, 15☐
12☐
12☐
14☐
14☐
14☐
14☐
12☐, 13☐, 15☐
12☐
Multiple-choice questions
1 A year 12 student is designing a practical investigation based on the question:
‘How does temperature and concentration affect the potential difference of galvanic cells?’
If the student is planning to conduct a single-variable exploration as part of their experiment,
what is the issue with their investigation question?
A They have two dependent variables.
B They have two independent variables.
C They have two controlled variables.
D Both temperature and concentration are control groups and not experimental groups.
2 Each piece of chemistry equipment has an inherent uncertainty with using it to take
measurements. This uncertainty affects which of the following?
A accuracy
B precision
C repeatability
D resolution
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
526
The following information relates to Questions 3–5.
A group of students was completing a titration to determine the concentration of potassium
permanganate, KMnO4, using an oxalic acid, C2H2O4, standard solution.
They prepared a standard oxalic acid solution of total volume 250 mL.
Aliquots of 10.00 mL of the potassium permanganate solutions were added to conical flasks and
titrated with the oxalic acid using the burette.
The student recorded the following results.
Final burette reading (mL) 49.80 27.50 45.90 23.60
Initial burette reading (mL) 5.35 23.60 0.00
27.50 Permanganate ions are a purple colour. Therefore, in this redox titration reaction, potassium
permanganate is reduced from purple to a colourless solution.
3 Why did the students record four readings for the titre volume?
A Four readings create a larger sample size, allowing them to calculate an average and improve
the accuracy of their results.
B Four readings increase the reproducibility of their results as all four readings are within the
required concordant range.
C Four readings remove any outliers, ensuring only concordant results are used to determine
an average, giving more precise results.
D Four readings ensure that through each trial any random and systematic errors could be
removed and thus not affect the results.
4 What type of data is being recorded by the students in this experiment?
A qualitative
B quantitative
C both qualitative and quantitative
D neither qualitative nor quantitative
5 One safety measure that would need to be followed by the students while performing this
redox titration is
A ensuring that distilled water is used when preparing the standard solution so it is not
contaminated with other ions present in the tap water.
B wearing gloves to prevent any irritation that may be caused from spillage of the potassium
permanganate solution or oxalic acid solution.
C wearing safety glasses to reduce the risk of them falling if liquid was accidentally spilled onto
the floor.
D wearing a lab coat to prevent any glassware that is chipped or broken cutting their face.
6 A teacher was performing an experiment for a group of students testing their own collected
sample of water, repeating their quality-testing technique five times.
Which aspect of their experiment was improved by repeating the procedure five times?
A accuracy
B reproducibility
C validity
D repeatability
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
527
7 Linsey performs a series of tests in conical flasks that were placed in a water bath to ensure the
flasks and the liquid inside them was kept at a constant temperature of 40°C.
In this experiment, the temperature at which this series of tests is conducted is the
A control group.
B independent variable.
C dependent variable.
D controlled variable.
8 The validity of experimental data depends mostly on
A the reproducibility of data recorded within the experiment.
B how close the averaged set of data is to the true value.
C whether the recorded data for the dependent variable is generated using only one
independent variable.
D the data being recorded using measurements that have limited random and systematic
errors.
9 If a student was to graph the effect of change in concentration of a reactant on the rate of a
chemical reaction, the best type of graph used to present the data would be a
A line graph.
B column graph.
C pie chart.
D histogram.
10 A hypothesis is best described as
A a statement describing what the investigation hopes to determine.
B a series of steps involved in planning an investigation.
C clear ethical guidelines for how any living organisms should be handled in the experiment.
D a prediction of what will be observed.
11 Which of the following statements would be appropriate in the ‘method’ section of a logbook?
A Exactly 50 mL of solution was measured using a measuring cylinder.
B Exactly 50 mL of solution was measured using a beaker.
C Solution was measured and placed in a tube.
D Add solution to a measuring cylinder.
Short-answer questions
12 A student was investigating the following research question:
How do the concentrations of sodium hydroxide (NaOH) and hydrochloric acid (HCl)
reagents affect the rate of their neutralisation reaction, assessed by measuring the increase in
temperature from the exothermic reaction?
a The student tested concentrations of 0.10 M, 0.50 M, 1.0 M and 2.0 M. Identify the
independent, dependent and controlled variables for this student’s investigation. (4 marks)
b Using your chemistry knowledge, write an aim and a hypothesis for this student’s
investigation. (4 marks)
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
528
The student followed the method outlined below.
1 Label four beakers with the following concentrations, respectively: 0.10 M, 0.50 M, 1.0 M
and 2.0 M. Then label two pipettes ‘HCl’ and ‘NaOH’, respectively.
2 Label two other beakers ‘HCl stock solution (0.10 M)’ and ‘NaOH stock solution (0.10 M)’,
respectively. Into the beaker labelled ‘HCl stock solution (0.10 M)’, pour 200 mL 0.10 M HCl,
and into the beaker labelled ‘NaOH stock solution (0.10 M)’, pour 200 mL 0.10 M NaOH.
3 Using the pipette labelled ‘HCl’, draw up 25 mL of the 0.10 M HCl stock solution
and dispense it into the beaker labelled ‘0.10 M’. Wait for the solution to reach room
temperature if it has not yet done so, then record the temperature.
4 Using the pipette labelled ‘NaOH’, draw up a 25 mL aliquot of the 0.10 M NaOH
stock solution.
5 Prepare a stopwatch and dispense the NaOH aliquot into the beaker labelled ‘0.10 M’.
Then immediately start the stopwatch.
6 After one minute, record the temperature change of the combined solution.
7 Safely dispose of the solution and clean the thermometers and beakers with distilled water.
8 Repeat steps 2–7 seven more times so there are eight trials at this concentration of HCl
and NaOH.
9 Repeat steps 2–8 of the experimental method for the remaining concentrations: 0.50 M,
1.0 M and 2.0 M.
c Using your understanding of the reagents used in this experiment, list the safety precautions
required for the student and explain why these are important to follow. d Draw a fully labelled diagram to represent the set-up of the experiment. The student recorded the following results from the investigation.
Change in temperature (∆T)
(4 marks)
(3 marks)
Initial concentration of
NaOH and HCl solution
T1 T2 T3 T4 T5 T6 T7 T8
0.10 M 1.5°C 1.0°C 1.0°C 1.0°C 0.50°C 1.0°C 1.0°C 0.50°C
0.50 M 2.0°C 1.0°C 3.0°C 3.5°C 3.5°C 3.0°C 3.5°C 3.0°C
1.0 M 6.0°C 6.0°C 5.5°C 5.5°C 6.5°C 6.5°C 6.5°C 6.5°C
2.0 M 12.5°C 12.0°C 12.0°C 11.5°C 13.0°C 12.5°C 12.5°C 12.0°C
e The student has forgotten to write a title for their table of results. Write an appropriate title
for them that includes reference to the independent and dependent variables. (2 marks)
f Identify two different things that the student could improve to follow correct conventions
with their table of results. (2 marks)
g For which concentration of NaOH and HCl tested were the recorded results most precise?
Explain. (2 marks)
h Based on the results above, what type of graph should be used to represent the
student’s results recorded? Explain your reasoning, referring specifically to the type
of data collected. (3 marks)
i Plot a graph to represent the results recorded in the table above by the student. Remember
to include an appropriate title for the graph and properly labelled axes. (4 marks)
j Synthesise the data from your graph in part i by describing the trend observed in your
results. Ensure you refer to data, including any outliers, in your discussion. (4 marks)
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
529
k Compare the results to the hypothesis you wrote for this student’s investigation in part b. Do
the results support or not support this hypothesis? Justify your answer. (2 marks)
The student’s analysis of their data connected to theory is included below.
‘For chemical reactions to occur, particles must undergo a successful collision with other
particles so that new particles can be formed. This is referred to as the collision theory, and in
relation to this experiment, when concentration increased, the frequency of successful collisions
increased, and thus reaction rate increased. This is because as concentration increases, the
molarity of the solution is subsequently increased. Molarity is the amount of moles per litre,
so as molarity increases, the moles per litre increases. For example, in this experiment, the
increase in concentration from 1.0 M to 2.0 M, the 2.0 M would have a greater number of moles
of reactants present to react. Subsequently, the probability of a successful collision increases,
leading to an increase in the amount of successful collisions between reactants. This will result in
more energy released into solution and to the nature of the exothermic reaction, thus increasing
temperature by a larger amount and therefore improving the rate of reaction.’
l Reading this and using your knowledge of the relevant theory, what changes would you
make to this analysis? (2 marks)
m Identify one random and one systematic error that could have occurred in this experiment.
In your answer, also include a way that the student could modify the experiment to improve
the results obtained. (4 marks)
n Compare the terms ‘repeatability’ and ‘reproducibility’, and outline which one has been
achieved in this student’s investigation. (3 marks)
o Using your knowledge of rates of reaction, suggest a future research question that could be
explored by the student. (1 mark)
p Clearly outline the difference between accuracy, precision and validity in relation to the
different types of errors that exist in an experimental investigation. (3 marks)
13 Using a calorimeter, the energy content of an oat bar was determined by the following
procedure.
1 A sample of the oat bar was placed onto the digital scales and accurately weighed.
2 The calorimeter was filled with a known volume of water and the temperature recorded
with a thermometer.
3 The power pack was turned on, igniting the wires in the calorimeter. The change in
temperature was recorded.
4 Steps 1–3 of the procedure were repeated.
a Looking more closely at step 2 in the method above, identify two ways in which this step
could be written more clearly in order for the experiment to be reproducible. b Explain the purpose of step 4 in the method above. c Identify one potential systematic error with this calorimetry experiment and the effect it
would have on the results if not removed. (2 marks)
(1 mark)
(2 marks)
A 10.00 g sample of two different oat bars was burned separately in the calorimeter using
an electrical current passed through a heating coil inside the calorimeter. Each sample was
burned completely. The results of this experiment are shown below.
Oat bar 1 Oat bar 2
Initial temperature (°C) 21.0 20.5
Final temperature (°C) 22.4 22.1
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
530
14 d In this specific experiment, identify the independent, dependent and two controlled
variables. (4 marks)
e Is there a control group for this experiment? Justify your decision by explaining
what the control group is or why there is no control group. (2 marks)
f Are the results obtained qualitative or quantitative? Explain by comparing these
two terms. If the results are numerical, include the units of the measured results. (2 marks)
g Write a suitable conclusion for this investigation, based on the results presented
in the table on the previous page. (2 marks)
The following questions relate to specific skills in the context of chemistry and are
regularly part of scientific investigations and calculations in experiments.
a Explain how to convert between mL and L when required to convert volume values
for calculations involving gas laws or moles. (1 mark)
b Explain how to convert concentrations in molarity to concentrations in grams
per litre. (1 mark)
c Identify how many significant figures are represented by the following numbers:
i 34.980
ii 10.0
iii 0.0034 (3 marks)
d What is the benefit for scientists in presenting their investigation results in the
form of a scientific poster? (1 mark)
e Explain in which ways the following reference source is presented in the appropriate
format and identify what further information can be provided that is currently
not included. (2 marks)
Drummond, B., Maaser, S., Angley, L., Greaves, R., Fraser, S., Lucas,
T., & Wang, Z. (2023). Cambridge Chemistry VCE Units 1 & 2.
Cambridge University Press.
15 A student was completing a practical investigation to determine the rate of reaction between
calcium and sulfuric acid. The method for their investigation is shown below.
1 A 2.0 M solution of sulfuric acid was prepared using a plastic pipette and distilled water.
2 A 100 mL flask was attached to a corresponding gas syringe.
3 Using a beaker, 25.0 mL was added to the flask.
4 1 teaspoon of calcium metal was added to the flask and the stopper immediately placed
on quickly to trap any of the gas produced.
5 The volume of gas produced was recorded using the graduations on the syringe.
a Describe two steps of the method above that would limit the accuracy of the results
that would be obtained by the student. (2 marks)
b The student hypothesised that the rate of reaction would decrease as the concentration
of acid decreased. Can the student conclude this from their experiment, if only the
steps in the method were conducted? Explain. (2 marks)
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
531
16 Fatima investigated whether a displacement reaction occurred using combinations of different
metals and ionic compound (salt) solutions. She used a stereomicroscope to observe the
outcomes of the different reactions as shown below.
The method for the experiment is written below.
1 After your teacher has demonstrated how to set up and focus the stereomicroscope,
place a Petri dish on the platform and use the forceps to place a piece of copper wire
in the centre of dish. Focus the stereomicroscope on the wire. Then place two or three
drops of the AgNO3 solution over the centre of the wire and observe the changes. You
will notice them immediately.
2 After a few minutes, carefully remove the Petri dish from the platform so that the crystals
that have formed are not disturbed and place it next to the stereomicroscope for further
observations. Record your observations in the table below.
3 Place a fresh clean Petri dish on the platform. Carefully place a small iron nail in the
centre of the dish. Focus the stereomicroscope on the nail. Then place two or three drops
of the CuCl2 solution over the centre of the nail and observe the changes. You will notice
them immediately.
4 Continue observing both reactions, swapping them out of the stereomicroscope carefully
so that the crystals and solutions are not disturbed. If practicable, observe the crystals
again on the following day. Record your observations in the table below.
Fatima recorded her results in a table, as shown below.
Mixture Initial appearance
of metal
Initial colour of salt
solution
Changes observed
Cu + AgNO3 Shiny bronze colour Clear transparent
solution
Brown substance
was deposited on the
metal. Solution turned
slightly blue in colour
Fe + CuCl2 Shiny silver colour Light-blue coloured
transparent solution
Solution became clear
over time and the
metal had growth of
black crystals on
the outside
a What type of data did Fatima collect? Explain. b What is missing from Fatima’s results table? (1 mark)
(1 mark)
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
532
Answer the following questions in relation to the chemical concepts covered
by Fatima in this experiment.
c Give the formulas of the species that were present before each reaction started
(this should include any charged ions). (4 marks)
d Based on Fatima’s observations and given that in a chemical reaction, no new
elements are created and none are destroyed, what must be the products of both
reactions? State their formulas. (2 marks)
e How can these changes be explained? What must have moved between
the reactants? (2 marks)
f Why do metals react in this way? (2 marks)
g From the reactions that took place in this experiment, what can be determined
about the reactivity of copper, iron and silver? Explain your reasoning. (3 marks)
h From your answer to part g above, predict what would happen if you were to
add some silver nitrate solution to an iron nail. State your reasoning. (1 mark)
i What safety requirements would Fatima have needed to implement in
this experiment? Explain why, in relation to the reactants that were used
in the displacement reactions. (4 marks)
j Identify an aspect of Fatima’s method that could be adjusted to increase
both the accuracy and the precision of her results. Explain how making such
an adjustment would improve the results by reducing the chance of bias
or errors in Fatima’s measurements. (4 marks)
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
UNIT 4 REVISION EXERCISE
533
Unit 4 Revision exercise
Multiple-choice questions
1 Methyl salicylate is used as an ingredient in mint-flavoured lollies and also for pain
relief for aching muscles and joints. The structure is shown below.
O
O
OH
What is the molecular mass of methyl salicylate in g mol–1?
A 137
B 148
C 152
D 154
2 Esters are formed from the reaction between primary alcohols and carboxylic acids.
One ester has the semi-structural formula, CH3CH2COOCH2CH3. The name of this
ester is
A ethyl propanoate.
B propyl ethanoate.
C ethyl butanoate.
D propyl propanoate.
3 The reaction between chlorine gas and pent-2-ene will produce which of the following
organic products?
A 2-chloropentane
B 1,2-dichloropentane
C 2,2-dichloropentane
D 2,3-dichloropentane
4 The complete hydrolysis of three triglyceride molecules results in the production of
how many water molecules?
A 1
B 3
C 6
D 9
5 The following equation shows how ethyl ethanoate, an ester, can be produced from
the reaction between ethanol and ethanoic acid.
C2H6O(l) + C2H4O2(l) → C4H8O2(l) + H2O(l)
Determine the percentage yield for the reaction if 14.7 g of the ester, C4H8O2, is
produced from the reaction of 9.20 g of C2H6O with excess C2H4O2.
A 6.25%
B 28.1%
C 62.6%
D 83.5%
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
534 UNIT 4 REVISION EXERCISE
6 The reaction of an organic compound with bromine water would be most useful to
distinguish between
A alkane versus alkene.
B alcohol versus carboxylic acid.
C aldehyde versus carboxylic acid.
D primary alcohol versus secondary alcohol.
7 The following structure is 3-methylbutanoic acid.
H
H
H
O
H
C
C
C
O H
H
H
H
HC
H
Which of the following combinations below correctly predicts the number of peaks
that would be observed in both 13C NMR and low-resolution 1H NMR?
13C NMR 1H NMR
A 4 3
B 5 4
C 4 4
D 5 3
8 In an HPLC chromatogram of a mixture containing compounds A, B and C,
compound A has a retention time of 3 minutes, compound B has a retention time of
6 minutes and compound C has a retention time of 9 minutes. If compound A is more
polar than B, and compound B is more polar than C, what does this tell you about the
stationary phase being used?
A It is relatively polar.
B It is relatively non-polar.
C It interacts most strongly with compound A.
D It has the same polarity as the mobile phase.
9 You perform mass spectrometry analysis of an organic compound. The molecular ion
peak occurs at an m/z of 105. You observe a peak with greater intensity at an m/z of
103. Which of the following could potentially explain this observation?
A The compound contains one bromine atom.
B The compound contains one chlorine atom.
C The compound contains two bromine atoms.
D The compound contains two chlorine atoms.
10 An IR spectrum shows strong absorptions at 1710 cm–¹ and 3300 cm–¹. What
functional group is most likely present in the molecule?
A ether
B alcohol
C aldehyde
D carboxylic acid
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
UNIT 4 REVISION EXERCISE
535
11 Which of the following compounds contains a chiral carbon atom?
A propane
B propan-1-ol
C propane-1,2-diol
D propane-1,2,3-triol
12 The level of protein structure that is stabilised by hydrogen bonding between atoms in
the R groups is the
A primary structure.
B secondary structure.
C tertiary structure.
D quaternary structure.
13 Which of the following is most true about the function of an enzyme at a temperature
lower than its optimal?
A The enzyme will have an altered primary structure.
B All enzyme molecules will be denatured at this temperature.
C The enzyme will not be able to catalyse the reaction at this temperature.
D The enzyme will bind less frequently to its substrate at this temperature.
14 Repeating an experiment multiple times and averaging the findings will help to
A generate a hypothesis.
B improve the precision of results.
C reduce the effect of random errors.
D reduce the effect of systematic errors.
15 A conclusion should not
A state key data from results.
B summarise the key findings of an investigation.
C state whether the hypothesis was supported.
D introduce new information relevant to the investigation.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
536 UNIT 4 REVISION EXERCISE
Short-answer questions
1 The reaction of 2-chloro-2-methylpropane with potassium hydroxide produces
2-methylpropan-2-ol. (9 marks)
a The mass spectrum for 2-chloro-2-methylpropane is shown below. The inset shows
isotope data for the elements present in the molecule.
100
80
Isotope data
1H : 2H
12C : 13C
35Cl : 37Cl
= 99.99 : 0.01
= 98.93 : 1.07
= 75.78 : 24.22
Relative intensity
60
40
20
0
10 15
20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60 65 70 75 80 85 90 95
m/z
i Define m/z as used in mass spectrometry. ii  Give a reason why the mass spectrum shows two molecular ion
peaks at m/z = 92 and 94, rather than just one. iii iv Identify the fragment that produces the peak at m/z = 94. Identify the fragment that produces the peak at m/z = 57. b The mass spectrum for 2-methylpropan-2-ol is shown below.
100
(1 mark)
(1 mark)
(1 mark)
(1 mark)
80
Relative intensity
60
40
20
0
10 15
20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60 65 70 75
m/z
i Label the base peak on the spectrum. (1 mark)
ii  Write an equation to show the formation of the molecular ion from
2-methylpropan-2-ol. (1 mark)
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
UNIT 4 REVISION EXERCISE
537
c After enough time passed for the reaction to occur, the organic product was isolated
and analysed with an infrared spectrometer. The resulting spectrum is shown below.
100
80
60
%T
40
20
0
4000 3000 2000 1500 1000 500
Wavenumber (cm–1)
Consider the region of the IR spectrum in the region 400–1500 cm–1
.
i Name this region. (1 mark)
ii  Explain why this region, and not the region 1500–4000 cm–1, is used to
identify the molecule. (1 mark)
iii  Is this spectrum consistent with the organic product being 2-methylpropan-2-ol?
Use evidence from the IR spectrum in the region 1500–4000 cm–1 in
your response. (1 mark)
2 Refer to the following molecules in your responses to this question. (8 marks)
NH2 H
HO C
C
C
H
H
4-methylpentan-1-ol 4-bromo-3-methylpent-2-ene O
Molecule 1 Molecule 2 Molecule 3
H
a Write the semi-structural formula of Molecule 1. b Draw the structural formula of Molecule 2. c Write the IUPAC name of Molecule 3. (1 mark)
(1 mark)
(1 mark)
d 4-Methylpentan-1-ol (Molecule 1) and hexan-1-ol are structural isomers.
Explain why hexan-1-ol is expected to have a higher boiling point than
4-methylpentan-1-ol. (3 marks)
e Using the skeletal representation, draw and name a positional isomer of
Molecule 3.  (2 marks)
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
538 UNIT 4 REVISION EXERCISE
3 The diagram below represents the reaction pathway for the synthesis of an ester.
a) b)
Steam/phosphoric
acid
c)
Ethanol Propanoic acid
Concentrated acid/warm
d)
H
H H O
H H
C
H H
C
O C
H H
H + H2O
 (7 marks)
a Draw the structural formula of the molecule in the box labelled a). b Draw the skeletal formula of the molecule in the box labelled b). (1 mark)
(1 mark)
c List any reagents and any specific conditions required in the box
labelled c). (2 marks)
d Write the name of the ester formed. (1 mark)
e Calculate the atom economy of the reaction involving ethanol and
propanoic acid to form the ester. 4 Amylase is an enzyme found in various organisms, including animals and plants. It
plays a key role in the digestion of starch, a carbohydrate, into sugars. a The secondary structure of amylase consists of alpha-helices and beta-sheets.
Describe the bonding that maintains the secondary structure of amylase.  (2 marks)
(8 marks)
(2 marks)
b Explain why amylase selectively catalyses the breakdown of starch but is not
effective in catalysing the breakdown of other carbohydrates. (2 marks)
c Alpha-amylase is a class of amylase found in the salivary glands that operates at
an optimal pH of 6.7–7.0. Explain how the activity of alpha-amylase would change
outside this pH range. (2 marks)
d Acarbose is a drug used for managing type 2 diabetes by inhibiting the action
of enzymes involved in carbohydrate digestion, including amylase. Explain how
competitive inhibitors such as acarbose affect enzyme activity. (2 marks)
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
UNIT 4 REVISION EXERCISE
539
5 A student has a sample of an organic compound with the molecular formula C4H4O2.
The student performs some tests on the compound and records their observations in
the table below. (8 marks)
Observation Conclusion
Test 1 Adding the compound to bromine
water causes a colour change
from orange to colourless.
Test 2 Blue litmus turns red.
Test 3 2 moles of NaOH reacts
completely with 1 mole of
the compound.
a For each test, write a conclusion about the structure of the compound. b Identify the type of reaction that occurred in Test 1. c Write a balanced chemical equation for the reaction taking place in Test 3.  d Draw the structural formula of the initial compound. (3 marks)
(1 mark)
(2 marks)
(1 mark)
e Describe an additional test that could be performed to confirm the purity
of the sample. (1 mark)
6 Isoprene is a naturally occurring organic compound that is found in essential oils. The
structure of isoprene is shown below.
CH2
H2C
CH3
High-performance liquid chromatography was used to determine the concentration
of isoprene in a sample of eucalyptus oil. Standard solutions of pure isoprene were
prepared, and a 2.0 mL sample of each standard solution was injected into the HPLC
column. The calibration graph of the peak area versus concentration is shown below.
A 2.0 mL sample of eucalyptus oil was injected into the HPLC column. The peak area
of the sample was found to be 2400.
4500
4000
3500
3000
Peak area
2500
2000
1500
1000
500
0
0 0.05 0.1 0.15 0.2 0.25 0.3 0.35 0.4 0.45
Isoprene concentration
 (5 marks)
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
540 UNIT 4 REVISION EXERCISE
a Determine the concentration of isoprene in eucalyptus oil, in mg L–1
. (1 mark)
b What volume of eucalyptus oil would be required to extract 1 mg of
isoprene, assuming an extraction yield of 90% could be achieved? (1 mark)
c
1H and 13C NMR spectroscopy were run on a sample of isoprene extracted from
eucalyptus oil.
i How many peaks would appear in the low-resolution 1H NMR spectrum
of pure isoprene? (1 mark)
ii iii Give the integration ratio of the peaks in the 1H NMR spectrum. (1 mark)
How many peaks would appear in the 13C NMR spectrum of
pure isoprene? (1 mark)
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al © Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
PERIOD
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
1
1
H
1.0
Hydrogen
3
Li
6.9
Lithium
11
Na
23.0
Sodium
19
K
39.1
Potassium
37
Rb
85.5
Rubidium
55
Cs
132.9
Caesium
87
Fr
(223)
Francium
4
Be
9.0
Beryllium
GROUP
3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12
2 181716151413
Atomic number
Relative atomic mass
Chemical symbol
Name of element
2
He
4.0
Helium
79
Au
197.0
Gold
5
B
10.8
Boron
6
C
12.0
Carbon
7
N
14.0
Nitrogen
8
O
16.0
Oxygen
9
F
19.0
Fluorine
10
Ne
20.2
Neon
12
Mg
24.3
Magnesium
13
Al
27.0
Aluminium
14
Si
28.1
Silicon
15
P
31.0
Phosphorus
16
S
32.1
Sulfur
17
Cl
35.5
Chlorine
18
Ar
39.9
Argon
20
Ca
40.1
Calcium
21
Sc
45.0
Scandium
22
Ti
47.9
Titanium
23
V
50.9
Vanadium
24
Cr
52.0
Chromium
25
Mn
54.9
Manganese
26
Fe
55.8
Iron
27
Co
58.9
Cobalt
28
Ni
58.7
Nickel
29
Cu
63.5
Copper
30
Zn
65.4
Zinc
31
Ga
69.7
Gallium
32
Ge
72.6
Germanium
33
As
74.9
Arsenic
34
Se
79.0
Selenium
35
Br
79.9
Bromine
36
Kr
83.8
Krypton
38
Sr
87.6
Strontium
39
Y
88.9
Yttrium
40
Zr
91.2
Zirconium
41
Nb
92.9
Niobium
42
Mo
96.0
Molybdenum
43
Tc
(98)
Technetium
44
Ru
101.1
Ruthenium
45
Rh
102.9
Rhodium
46
Pd
106.4
Palladium
47
Ag
107.9
Silver
48
Cd
112.4
Cadmium
49
In
114.8
Indium
50
Sn
118.7
Tin
51
Sb
121.8
Antimony
52
Te
127.6
Tellurium
53
I
126.9
Iodine
54
Xe
131.3
Xenon
56
Ba
137.3
Barium
57–71
Lanthanides
72
Hf
178.5
Hafnium
73
Ta
180.9
Tantalum
74
W
183.8
Tungsten
75
Re
186.2
Rhenium
76
Os
190.2
Osmium
77
Ir
192.2
Iridium
78
Pt
195.1
Platinum
79
Au
197.0
Gold
80
Hg
200.6
Mercury
81
Tl
204.4
Thallium
82
Pb
207.2
Lead
83
Bi
209.0
Bismuth
84
Po
(210)
Polonium
85
At
(210)
Astatine
86
Rn
(222)
Radon
88
Ra
(226)
Radium
89–103
Actinoids
104
Rf
(261)
Rutherfordium
105
Db
(262)
Dubnium
106
Sg
(266)
Seaborgium
107
Bh
(264)
Bohrium
108
Hs
(267)
Hassium
109
Mt
(268)
Meitnerium
110
Ds
(271)
Darmstadtium
111
Rg
(272)
Roentgenium
112
Cn
(285)
Copernicium
113
Nh
(280)
Nihonium
114
Fl
(289)
Flerovium
115
Mc
(289)
Moscovium
116
Lv
(292)
Livermorium
117
Ts
(294)
Tennessine
118
Og
(294)
Oganesson
57
La
138.9
Lanthanum
58
Ce
140.1
Cerium
59
Pr
140.9
Praseodymium
60
Nd
144.2
Neodymium
61
Pm
(145)
Promethium
62
Sm
150.4
Samarium
63
Eu
152.0
Europium
64
Gd
157.3
Gadolinium
65
Tb
158.9
Terbium
66
Dy
162.5
Dysprosium
67
Ho
164.9
Holmium
68
Er
167.3
Erbium
69
Tm
168.9
Thulium
70
Yb
173.1
Ytterbium
71
Lu
175.0
Lutetium
89
Ac
(227)
Actinium
90
Th
232.0
Thorium
91
Pa
231.0
Protactinium
92
U
238.0
Uranium
93
Np
(237)
Neptunium
94
Pu
(244)
Plutonium
95
Am
(243)
Americium
96
Cm
(247)
Curium
97
Bk
(247)
Berkelium
98
Cf
(251)
Californium
99
Es
(252)
Einsteinium
100
Fm
(257)
Fermium
101
Md
(258)
Mendelevium
102
No
(259)
Nobelium
103
Lr
(262)
Lawrencium
Appendix: Data
Appendix: Periodic table
Periodic table
541
542
Electrochemical series
Reaction Standard electrode potential (E0)
in volts at 25°C
F2(g) + 2e– ⇌ 2F–(aq) +2.87
H2O2(aq) + 2H+(aq) + 2e– ⇌ 2H2O(l) +1.77
Au+(aq) + e– ⇌ Au(s) +1.68
Cl2(g) + 2e– ⇌ 2Cl–(aq) +1.36
O2(g) + 4H+(aq) + 4e– ⇌ 2H2O(1) +1.23
Br2(l) + 2e– ⇌ 2Br–(aq) +1.09
Ag+(aq) + e– ⇌ Ag(s) +0.80
Fe3+(aq) + e– ⇌ Fe2+(aq) +0.77
O2(g) + 2H+(aq) + 2e– ⇌ H2O2(aq) +0.68
I2(s) + 2e– ⇌ 2I–(aq) +0.54
O2(g) + 2H2O(l) + 4e– ⇌ 4OH– (aq) +0.40
Cu2+(aq) + 2e– ⇌ Cu(s) +0.34
Sn4+(aq) + 2e– ⇌ Sn2+(aq) +0.15
S(s) + 2H+(aq) + 2e– ⇌ H2S(g) +0.14
2H+(aq) + 2e– ⇌ H2(g) 0.00
Pb2+(aq) + 2e– ⇌ Pb(s) –0.13
Sn2+(aq) + 2e– ⇌ Sn(s) –0.14
Ni2+(aq) + 2e– ⇌ Ni(s) –0.25
Co2+(aq) + 2e– ⇌ Co(s) –0.28
Cd2+(aq) + 2e– ⇌ Cd(s) –0.40
Fe2+(aq) + 2e– ⇌ Fe(s) –0.44
Zn2+(aq) + 2e– ⇌ Zn(s) –0.76
2H2O(l) + 2e– ⇌ H2(g) + 2OH–(aq) –0.83
Mn2+(aq) + 2e– ⇌ Mn(s) –1.18
Al3+(aq) + 3e– ⇌ Al(s) –1.66
Mg2+(aq) + 2e– ⇌ Mg(s) –2.37
Na+(aq) + e– ⇌ Na(s) –2.71
Ca2+(aq) + 2e– ⇌ Ca(s) –2.87
K+(aq) + e– ⇌ K(s) –2.93
Li+(aq) + e– ⇌ Li(s) –3.04
© VCAA 2020 Chemistry Examination Data Book
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
543
Glossary
Absorption band
a range of wavelengths in the IR spectrum
where absorption of infrared light occurs
Accuracy
how close the measurements are to the ‘true’
value of the quantity being measured
Achiral
a shape or structure that can be superimposed
on its mirror image
Activation energy
the minimum quantity of energy required so
that a chemical reaction can proceed
Active site
the region of an enzyme where the
substrate(s), also known as reactants, bind
for a chemical reaction to take place
Actual yield
the actual quantity of product obtained from
a reaction
Addition reaction
a reaction in which two or more reactants
combine to form a larger product. Addition
reactions require an unsaturated reactant
Aerobic
an organism or process that requires the
presence of free oxygen
Aim
the main purpose of an investigation
Alcohol
a family of organic compounds characterised
by a hydroxyl (–OH) functional group
Aldehyde
a molecule containing a carbonyl group
where the carbon atom of the carbonyl group
is bonded to a hydrogen atom. It has the
general formula RCHO
Alkanol
an alkane in which a hydroxyl group (–OH)
has replaced a hydrogen atom
Alkyl group
a group that is part of a larger molecule
and is represented as an alkane minus a
hydrogen atom, e.g. methyl (–CH3)
α-Glucose
a form of glucose in which the hydroxyl
group on carbon 1 is on the same side of
the six-membered ring as the hydroxyl
group on carbon 4
Amide functional group
a functional group consisting of –CONH2
Amine
a family of organic compounds characterised
by an amino (–NH2) functional group
Amino functional group
a functional group consisting of –NH2
Ampere
the unit used for measuring electric current;
also known as amp
Amylose
a type of starch made from α-glucose
units bonded to each other through
α-1,4-glycosidic bonds
Anabolic
a biochemical process requiring energy,
where simple molecules combine to generate
complex molecules
Anaerobic
an organism or process that does not
require oxygen
Analyte
a solution of unknown concentration in
titration that is the subject of analysis
Anode
the electrode at which oxidation occurs. In a
galvanic cell, the anode is negative
Aromatic compound
a cyclic molecule with a ring of delocalised
electrons
Baeyer’s test
a test for an unsaturated carbon–carbon
bond, such as an alkene
Base peak
the highest intensity peak in a mass spectrum
Biodiesel
a type of biofuel composed of the esters of
fatty acids
Bioethanol
a type of biofuel produced by fermentation in
plants and yeast
Biofuel
a renewable energy source produced from
biological matter called biomass
Biogas
a type of biofuel formed from the breakdown
of organic waste by anaerobic bacteria
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
544
Biomass
renewable organic matter that comes from
plants, animals and other living organisms
Boiling point
the temperature at which a substance
begins to boil, which occurs when the
vapour pressure of the substance equals the
atmospheric pressure
Bond strength
the amount of energy required to break apart
one mole of a covalent bond in the gas state,
measured in kJ mol–1; also referred to as
average bond energy
Branched isomer
a molecule in with the same molecular
formula but different arrangement of
alkyl branches
By-product
a product of a chemical reaction or industrial
process that is produced as a direct result of
the desired reaction, and so appears as part
of the fully balanced chemical equation
Calorimetry
an experimental method by which the heat
energy of food or a fuel is measured
Carbohydrate
a sugar or a saccharide, ranging from simple
sugars (monosaccharides) to complex sugars
(polysaccharides)
Carbonyl group
a functional group consisting of –C=O
Carboxyl group
a functional group consisting of –COOH. It
consists of a carbonyl group bonded to a
hydroxyl group
Carboxylic acid
a family of organic molecules characterised
by the presence of a carboxyl group
Catabolic
a biochemical process releasing energy, in
which complex molecules are broken down
into simple molecules
Catalyse
to speed up a reaction
Catalysis
a process in which a catalyst is used to speed
up a reaction
Catalyst
a substance that increases the rate of a
chemical reaction by lowering the activation
energy by providing an alternative reaction
pathway and is itself not consumed as part of
the reaction
Catalytic electrode
an electrode made from or coated with a
substance that acts to speed up the rate of a
reaction in an electrolytic cell
Cathode
the electrode at which reduction occurs. In a
galvanic cell, the cathode is positive
Cellular respiration
the transformation of the chemical energy
stored in glucose into usable energy (ATP)
for cells
Chain isomer
see Skeletal isomer
Chemical energy
energy stored within the bonds between atoms
Chemical shift
the position of a signal in the nuclear
magnetic resonance (NMR) spectrum
relative to the signal produced by a reference
compound, usually tetramethylsilane (TMS);
measured in parts per million, ppm
Chiral
a shape or structure that cannot be
superimposed on its mirror image. Chiral is
from the Greek word for ‘hand’
Chiral centre
an atom in a molecule that is bonded to four
different groups, and these groups can be
arranged in two different ways, resulting in
two mirror image structures
Closed system
an environment where energy can be
transferred between the reaction and the
surroundings, but matter cannot
Coal
sedimentary rock containing plant remains
formed over millions of years
Collision theory
the principle that allows for the prediction of
the success and rate of a chemical reaction
Competitive inhibition
the process of disrupting the function of
an enzyme by blocking its active site with a
molecule other than the substrate
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
Complete combustion
a combustion reaction of organic fuel that
takes place in the presence of excess oxygen
gas to produce carbon dioxide and water
Complex half-equation
either the reduction or oxidation component
of a redox reaction involving more than
one element
Conclusion
a summary of what you can deduce from the
results of the investigation, including whether
the tested hypothesis was supported
Concordant
in titration, the volume of two or more titres
that are within 0.10 mL of each other
Condensation reaction
a type of chemical reaction where two
molecules combine to form a larger
molecule with the release of a small
molecule, usually water
Condensed formula
see Semi-structural formula
Conjugate redox pair
a reducing agent and its corresponding
conjugate oxidising agent
Continuous data
data that is measurable and continuous, with
infinite possible values; best represented by a
line graph
Controlled variable
anything kept constant, or monitored, so
it does not affect the independent and
dependent variables, and therefore the
validity of experimental results
Constitutional isomer
see Structural isomer
Coulomb
the unit used to measure the amount of
electric charge something has
Crude oil
a naturally occurring mixture of liquid
hydrocarbons that can be used as a fuel source
Current
the rate at which electrons flow within a circuit
Cyclic alkane
a molecule with one or more rings of
saturated carbons in its structure
Cycloalkane
see Cyclic alkane
545
Degree of unsaturation
a calculation of the number of ring systems
and double bonds (and triple bonds) in a
molecule; can be shortened to DoU
Delocalised electron
an electron that is not associated with any
particular atom and is free to move
Denatured
refers to an enzyme that has lost its
conformational three-dimensional structure
and hence cannot function as a catalyst
Dependent variable
the variable that changes in response to
changes in the independent variable; the
experimenter measures these changes
Dimer
a complex in which two identical or similar
molecules are linked together
Disaccharide
a compound consisting of two sugar units
linked by a glycosidic bond
Discharge cycle
when spontaneous chemical reactions
occur converting chemical energy into
electrical energy
Discrete data
data that is countable and in discrete
categories; contains distinct or separate
values; best represented by a bar graph
Dynamic equilibrium
when the forward and reverse reactions are
occurring at the same non-zero rate
Electric charge
the amount of energy electrons carry;
symbol Q
Electrical energy
energy that involves the flow of electrons
and/or charged particles
Electrochemical cell
a system where electrical energy can be
converted to chemical energy or vice versa
Electrochemical series
series of reduction half-cell reactions and
their corresponding standard electrode
potentials in order of strongest oxidising
agent to weakest oxidising agent listed on the
left-hand side
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
546
Electrode
solid conducting material that can carry
electric current; a connecting terminal that
allows current to flow
Electrode polarity
the positive or negative charge associated
with electrodes in an electrochemical
cell because of reduction or oxidation
occurring on their surface. In a galvanic
cell, the cathode is positive and the anode
is negative
Electrolysis
the process of forcing a redox reaction to
occur by passing an electric current through
an electrolyte
Electrolyte
a non-reactive solution or paste that enables
the flow of charged particles and helps to
facilitate the redox reactions
Electrolytic cell
a system in which electrical energy is
converted to chemical energy
Electron transfer
the exchange of electrons that occurs during
a redox reaction. Electrons are transferred
from the reducing agent to the oxidising agent
Electroplating
an application of electrolysis, whereby
electrical energy is used to deposit a coating
of one metal onto the surface of another
substance
Enantiomer
a molecule that has the same chemical
formula and similar physical and structural
properties to another, but the two are mirror
images of each other
End point
the point in titration when the indicator
changes colour
Endothermic
a reaction that has a positive enthalpy change
value and absorbs heat from the environment
Enhanced greenhouse effect
the change of the normal climate equilibrium
on Earth, primarily increased global
temperatures; caused by increased emissions
of greenhouse gases; also known as
global warming
Enthalpy
the internal energy of a chemical system
(plus the product of pressure and volume)
Enthalpy change
the difference in enthalpy between reactants
and products in a chemical reaction;
symbol ΔH
Enzyme
a protein molecule that acts as a catalyst in a
specific biochemical reaction
Equilibrium
the state in which the concentration of
reactants and products does not change
Equilibrium constant
the value of the reaction quotient at
equilibrium; symbol K
Equivalence point
the point in a titration when the amount,
in moles, of reactants is present in
the stoichiometric ratio that achieves
neutralisation
Ester
a molecule containing the ester functional
group with the general formula RCOOR’
Ester functional group
a functional group consisting of –COO–
Esterification reaction
a type of condensation reaction that forms an
ester from a carboxylic acid and an alcohol
Exothermic
a reaction that has a negative enthalpy
change value and releases heat to
the environment
Extent of reaction
the degree to which a reaction goes
to completion
Faraday’s constant
the amount of charge that 1 mole of electrons
carries (F = 96 500 C mol–1)
Fatty acid
a compound consisting of a carboxyl group
with a long non-polar hydrocarbon chain,
which can either be saturated or unsaturated
Fermentation
the process by which glucose is broken
down in the absence of oxygen to produce
energy (ATP); also called anaerobic
cellular respiration
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
Fingerprint region
the part of an infrared spectrum that is found
between 500 cm–1 and 1500 cm–1, which,
like a fingerprint, is unique and characteristic
of a compound
First-generation feedstock
a biofuel produced from edible feedstocks
(starch, glucose) from plants such as corn
and wheat
Fluid
a substance that has no fixed shape and
gives way to external pressure. Liquids and
gases are considered fluids
Fossil fuel
a source of fuel made from decomposing
plants and animals over hundreds of millions
of years. It consists mainly of carbon and
hydrogen atoms
Fracking
a process in which fluid is injected at high
pressure, fracturing sedimentary rocks,
releasing gas or oil
Fractional distillation
separation of a mixture of liquids into separate
fractions based on their boiling points
Free radical
a short-lived uncharged molecule with an
unpaired valence electron
Fuel
any substance that stores chemical energy
Fuel cell
a type of electrochemical cell that produces
electrical energy from chemical energy,
requiring a continuous supply of reactants
Functional group
an atom or a group of atoms in an organic
molecule that largely determines the
molecule’s properties and reactions
Functional group isomer
a molecule with the same molecular formula
and parent hydrocarbon but different types
of functional groups
Galvanic cell
a system in which a spontaneous redox
reaction takes place, converting chemical
energy to electrical energy
547
Gasification
the process through which carbon-based
material is converted into gas products that
can be used for fuel
Global warming
the long-term warming of Earth’s
surface temperature, observed since the
pre-industrial period
Glycerol
a compound containing three hydroxyl
groups, with the chemical formula C3H8O3
Glycogen
a highly branched polysaccharide of
α-glucose joined by α-1,4 glycosidic bonds
and α-1,6 glycosidic bonds. Glycogen is
made by animals as a storage of energy
Glycosidic bond
the C–O–C linkage between two
monosaccharide units; also called an
ether bond
Green chemistry
the design of chemical products and
processes that reduce or eliminate the use
and generation of hazardous substances
Green hydrogen
hydrogen generated by renewable energy
with lower carbon emissions than other
sources of hydrogen
Greenhouse gas
a gas that absorbs and emits infrared
radiation in the atmosphere, causing warming
of Earth’s surface
Half-cell
one half of a galvanic cell that contains an
electrode submerged in a solution of ions
Half-equation
either the reduction or oxidation part of a
redox reaction
Haloalkane
an alkane in which one or more halogen
atoms has replaced a hydrogen atom
or atoms
Halogenation reaction
a chemical reaction that involves the
incorporation of one or more halogen atoms
into a compound
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
548
Hazardous substance
a substance that can cause harm to your
health or the environment
Heterogeneous
a mixture composed of substances in
different states or phases
Homogeneous
a mixture composed of substances in the
same state or phase
Homogeneous equilibrium
an equilibrium system where all of the
reactants and products are in the
same phase
Homologous series
a sequence of compounds that have identical
functional groups and similar chemical
properties but differ by a –CH2– group in
their structure
Hydration reaction
a reaction in which a water molecule is added
to an unsaturated molecule
Hydrogenation reaction
a reaction in which a hydrogen molecule is
added to an unsaturated molecule
Hydrohalogenation reaction
a reaction in which a hydrogen
halide molecule is added to an
unsaturated molecule
Hydrolysis reaction
a type of chemical reaction involving the
addition of water to break a larger molecule
into smaller products; hydro refers to ‘water’,
lysis refers to ‘breaking apart’
Hydroxyl group
a functional group characterised by –OH
bonded to a carbon atom
Hypothesis
a prediction of the outcomes, which are
testable experimentally and form the basis
of the methodology
Incomplete combustion
a combustion reaction of organic fuel that
takes place when oxygen is the limiting
reagent to produce carbon monoxide
and water
Independent variable
the variable for which quantities are changed
by the experimenter
Inert
largely non-reactive; does not take part in
a reaction
Inorganic
a chemical that does not contain both
carbon and hydrogen or contains substances
obtained from minerals
Integration curve
the area under a peak that directly correlates
to the number of protons producing that
particular signal in the spectrum
Intermediate compound
a chemical compound that is synthesised
from a simpler compound and intended
to be used for preparation of more
complex molecules
Introduction
a detailed, but succinct, explanation of the
reason for undertaking the investigation;
includes key chemical concepts, aim
and hypothesis
Ion
a positively or negatively charged atom that
has either lost or gained electron(s)
Irreversible reaction
a unidirectional reaction where the reactants
are converted to products, which cannot
react further to produce the starting
compounds again
Ketone
a molecule containing a carbonyl group
where the carbon of the carbonyl group is
bonded to two other carbon atoms. It has
the general formula RCOR’
Kinetic energy
the energy an object or particle has due to
its motion
Le Chaˆtelier’s principle
If an equilibrium system is subjected to
a change, the system will adjust itself
to partially oppose that change and
restore equilibrium
Limiting reagent (or reactant)
the reagent that is completely used up in a
reaction and therefore limits the amount of
product that can be formed
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
Line of best fit
a line on a graph that shows the general trend
of the data points; the distance to the points
above the line should equal the distance to
the points below the line
Lipid
a substance found in living systems that is
derived from fatty acids. Common examples
include fats and oils
Melting point
the temperature range from which a solid first
starts to transition to a liquid state until this
process has finished (i.e. all of the solid has
become liquid or completely melted)
Method
a series of numbered steps describing the
procedure
Mobile phase
the liquid or gas that flows during a
chromatography experiment, which
transports the compounds to be separated at
different rates over the stationary phase
Molar volume
a measure of how much product is formed in a
reaction, which can be calculated quantitatively
Molecular formula
the chemical formula that gives the total
number of atoms of each element within
a compound
Molecular ion peak
the ion peak that represents the molecular
weight of the compound
Molten electrolyte
a chemical substance made from a hot
liquified salt heated to over 100°C
Monomer
a molecule that forms bonds with other
identical molecules as the repeating units
that make up a polymer
Monosaccharide
a single sugar unit
Monounsaturated
an organic compound that contains one
carbon-carbon double bond
Multiplet
the resulting peaks when peak splitting
occurs in an NMR spectrum, which can
provide important information about
molecular structure
549
n-Alkane
a straight-chain (unbranched) alkane
Natural gas
a fossil fuel formed when layers of
decomposing plant and animal remains
experience high temperatures and pressures
Non-renewable
limited or not capable of being replenished at
a rate equal to consumption
Non-spontaneous redox reaction
a reaction that transforms electrical energy
into chemical potential energy and has a
negative cell potential (i.e. E < 0)
Open system
an environment where both energy and
matter can be transferred between the
reaction and the surroundings
Organic
a chemical that contains both carbon and
hydrogen (hydrocarbons) or substances
obtained from plants and animals
Outlier
a reading that is very different from other
results obtained for the same measurement
Oxidation
a loss of electrons
Oxidation number
a measure of the degree of oxidation of an
atom in a substance; defined as the charge
an atom might have when electrons are
counted to help identify redox reactions,
oxidising agents and reducing agents
Oxidised
describes a chemical species that has
undergone oxidation – that is, it has lost
electrons in a reaction
Oxidising agent
the reactant in a redox reaction that causes
oxidation. It is itself reduced and therefore
will gain electrons – its oxidation number
will decrease
Parent hydrocarbon
the longest continuous carbon chain in
a molecule
Peak splitting
the division of a signal into several smaller
peaks due to interactions with adjacent nuclei
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
550
Peptide
a short sequence of 2-amino acids joined
by peptide bonds. Two 2-amino acids
joined together by a peptide bond is
called a dipeptide; three 2-amino acids
make a tripeptide. A longer sequence
is called a polypeptide. Proteins are
polypeptides containing tens or thousands
of 2-amino acids
Peptide bond
a chemical bond between two amino acids
Percentage atom economy
a measure of the percentage of the atoms in
the reactants that are incorporated into the
desired product
Percentage yield
a measure of the amount of product obtained
as a percentage of the theoretical maximum
amount of product that could be obtained
from a reaction
Pharmacology
the branch of medicine that studies the
origin, chemistry and use of drugs with their
associated effects on the body
Photosynthesis
a chemical reaction in which light energy is
used to convert the inorganic compounds
carbon dioxide, CO2, and water, H2O, into
the organic compound glucose; photo = light,
synthesis = build or put together
Polymer
a long-chain molecule made up of a large
number of smaller repeating units (monomers)
Polypeptide
a long chain of α-amino acids forming part of
a protein
Polysaccharide
a compound consisting of many sugar units
linked by glycosidic bonds
Polyunsaturated
an organic compound that has two or more
C=C double bonds or C≡C triple bonds
Porous electrode
an electrode with tiny spaces or holes through
which substances, in particular gases, can
diffuse easily
Position of equilibrium
a quantitative measure of the relative
amounts of reactants and products in an
equilibrium system
Positional isomer
a molecule with the same molecular formula
and parent hydrocarbon but different
positions of functional groups
Potential difference
a difference in the amount of energy that the
valence electrons have in atoms of different
reactants used in galvanic cells. The greater
the potential difference, the greater the
voltage produced
Precision
how close all the measurements are to
each other
Primary alcohol (1o alcohol)
an alcohol molecule in which the carbon
bonded to the hydroxyl group is also bonded
to (at most) one alkyl group
Primary amide
a molecule containing an amide functional
group with the general formula RCONH2
Primary cell
a type of electrochemical cell that
spontaneously produces electrical energy
from chemical energy; also referred to as a
voltaic cell or battery
Primary data
sourced data that is collected firsthand by the
researcher for a specific purpose; commonly
collected through investigations, observations,
interviews, field work or surveys
Protein
a polymer that consists of amino acids linked
by peptide bonds
Purity
the degree to which a substance or
compound is free from contaminants or other
unwanted materials
Qualitative
the non-numerical characterisation of
a substance or sample based on its
observable properties
Qualitative data
data that is descriptive (not numeric)
Quantitative
the numerical determination of the quantity or
concentration of a substance or component
in a sample
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
Quantitative data
data that is measured and represented
numerically
Random error
an unpredictable variation in the readings
obtained due to variables not all being
controlled (extraneous variables), resulting
in the readings being higher or lower
than expected
Reaction pathway
a sequence of reactions that convert a simple
starting material into a desired product
Reaction quotient
the measurement of the relative amounts of
products and reactants in a given reaction;
symbol Q
Reagent
a chemical compound or mixture, typically
inorganic, introduced to cause the desired
change in an organic substance
Recharge cycle
when electrical energy is used to force a
non-spontaneous redox reaction that converts
electrical energy into chemical energy
Redox couple
a reducing agent, which donates
electrons, and its corresponding oxidising
agent, which accepts electrons
Redox reaction
a reaction involving a transfer of electrons.
Both reduction and oxidation occur
simultaneously
Reducing agent
the reactant in a redox reaction that causes
reduction. It is itself oxidised and therefore
will lose electrons – its oxidation number
will increase
Reduction
a gain of electrons
Reliability
the extent to which an experiment
always yields the same results under the
same conditions
Renewable
a resource that can be replenished at an
equal or higher rate than it is consumed
551
Renewable feedstock
raw material that is used to supply
an industrial process and can be
readily replenished
Repeatability
the ability to produce the same results when
the experiment is repeated in one lab by one
operator under the same conditions
Reproducibility
when the same results are obtained for the
same experiment by different operators using
different equipment
Resolution
the smallest change in the quantity being
measured that results in a noticeable
change in the value shown on the piece of
measuring equipment
Retention time
the time taken from when the sample is
added to the column to when it is eluted;
symbol Rt
Reversible reaction
a reaction that can proceed in both
directions: from reactants to products and
from products to reactants
Salt bridge
connects the circuit in a galvanic cell and
contains ions that balance the charges
formed from each half-cell
Saponification reaction
a reaction that hydrolyses an ester under
basic conditions
Saturated
an organic molecule in which all C–C bonds
are single bonds
Secondary alcohol (2o alcohol)
an alcohol molecule in which the carbon
bonded to the hydroxyl group is also bonded
to two alkyl groups
Secondary cell
a type of electrochemical cell that can
undergo charge and discharge cycles;
therefore, it can be recharged and reused
Secondary data
existing data that is collected and/or
utilised by someone other than the primary
investigator. Common examples include
published journal articles, books or websites
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
552
Semi-structural formula
a representation of organic molecules that
shows the order in which atoms or groups
of atoms are connected; also called
condensed formula
Simple half-equation
either the reduction or oxidation part of a
redox reaction involving only one element
Single-variable exploration
an investigation that contains only one
independent and one dependent variable
Skeletal formula
a representation of molecular structure in
which covalent bonds are shown as zigzag
lines. The symbol for all elements other than
C and H are always drawn. Carbon and
hydrogen are often omitted
Skeletal isomer
a molecule with the same molecular formula
but differing in the arrangement of its carbon
structure; also referred to as a chain isomer
Solution calorimeter
an instrument used to measure the heat
absorbed or released during a chemical
reaction, dissolution or neutralisation
occurring in a liquid solution
Solvent extraction
a process used to separate compounds
from mixtures by dissolving the desired
compounds in a solvent, often with additional
heating or agitation
Species
any reactant or product in a chemical
reaction
Specific heat capacity
the amount of energy required to raise the
temperature of one gram of a substance by
one degree Celsius; symbol c
Spectator ion
a cation or anion that is present on both
sides of a chemical equation and remains
unchanged during the reaction
Spontaneous reaction
a reaction that takes place without the input
of external energy
Standard cell potential
the theoretical amount of voltage that a
galvanic cell can produce under standard
conditions; also referred to as electromotive
force (emf)
Standard electrode potential
the amount of voltage that can be produced
by a half-cell, with reference to the standard
hydrogen electrode
Standard hydrogen electrode
the hydrogen half-cell consisting of hydrogen
gas, H2(g), and hydrogen ions, H+(aq). It
is used as a reference against which the
standard electrode potentials for all other
half-cells are determined
Standard laboratory conditions
refers to the standard laboratory conditions
(SLC) of 25°C and 100 kPa, as specified by
the International Union of Pure and Applied
Chemistry (IUPAC)
Standard solution
a solution that contains a precisely
known concentration; often used in
volumetric analysis
Starch
a polysaccharide of α-glucose joined by
glycosidic bonds. Starch is made by plants as
a storage of energy
Stationary phase
a solid, liquid or gel that remains static during
a chromatography experiment
Stoichiometric
the quantity of reagents, as a molar ratio,
as prescribed by the balanced equation
of a reaction
Stoichiometry
the quantitative relationship between two or
more substances during a reaction, based on
the ratio in which they react
Straight-chain alkane
an alkane consisting of a continuous chain of
carbon atoms
Structural formula
a representation of how the individual
atoms of the compound may be arranged
in three-dimensional space
Structural isomer
a molecule with the same molecular formula
but different connectivity of atoms; also
referred to as a constitutional isomer
Substitution reaction
a reaction in which an atom or group of
atoms is replaced by another atom or group
of atoms
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
553
Substrate
reactant molecule(s) that binds to the active
site of an enzyme and then takes part in
a reaction
Surface area
a measure of the area of a solid that is
exposed and able to react
Systematic error
when the readings obtained from
measurements differ from the ‘true’ value
consistently in one direction every time
Tertiary alcohol (3o alcohol)
an alcohol molecule in which the carbon
bonded to the hydroxyl group is also
bonded to three alkyl groups
Theoretical yield
the theoretical maximum quantity of product
that could be obtained from a reaction if all the
limiting reagent is converted to the product
Title
the research question under investigation;
includes information about what is
being tested
Titrant
a solution of known concentration that is
added in titration
Transesterification
a reaction involving an ester and an alcohol
to form a new ester. The alcohol involved
becomes the new alkyl group of the
ester product
Triglyceride
an organic compound in which the three
hydroxyl groups of glycerol form esters with
three fatty acid molecules
True value
the value or range of values that would
be obtained if the quantity could be
measured perfectly
Ultraviolet light
a form of electromagnetic radiation with
wavelengths shorter than those of visible light
and hence is invisible to most humans
Unsaturated
a molecule that has one or more C=C double
bonds or C≡C triple bonds
Valence electron
an electron found in the outermost shell of
an atom
Valence shell
the outermost shell of an atom
Valence shell electron pair
repulsion (VSEPR)
a model used to predict the geometric shape
of molecules based on the number of valence
shell electron pairs surrounding the central
atoms in molecules
Validity
the extent to which all variables in the
experiment have been controlled, so that
the independent variable is the only factor
that changes
Vapour pressure
the pressure exerted by the gas particles of a
substance just above its liquid or solid phase
Viscosity
a measure of a fluid’s resistance to flow
Voltage
the amount of electrical potential that exists
between two points
Voltmeter
an instrument used for measuring
electrical potential
Waste
unwanted substances that have no further
value in production
Wavenumber
a measure of frequency denoting the number
of wavelengths per unit distance, usually in
reciprocal centimetres (cm–1), with higher
values corresponding to higher energy
transitions in a molecule
Zwitterion
a molecule with equal positive and negative
charges, giving it an overall neutral charge;
also called a dipolar ion
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
554
Index
β-Carotene, 271
acknowledgements, 521
activation energy, 25
actual yield, 235, 368
addition reactions, 342–6
aerobic processes, 19
alcohols, 292
ethanol, 287
grain alcohol, 287
methanol, 287
nomenclature, 294
primary alcohols, 292–3, 346–7, 393
secondary alcohols, 292, 293, 393
skeletal formula, 295
structures, 392
tertiary alcohols, 292, 293, 393
types, 292–3
wood alcohol, 287
aldehydes
chemical formula and structure, 301–2
nomenclature, 303
skeletal structure, 303–4
alkanes
branched isomers, 274
drawing, 277
nomenclature, 274–6
straight-chain alkane homologous series, 273
substitution reactions, 338–9
alkanol, 292
alkenes, 342
addition reactions, 342–6
characteristics, 278
commercial uses, 278
formulas of straight-chain alkenes, 278
halogenation reactions, 343
hydration reactions, 344–5
hydrogenation reactions, 342
hydrohalogenation reactions, 343
nomenclature, 279
amide functional group, 310
amines, 295
amino acids, 475, 487–8
amino functional group, 295–6
amperes, 138
amylose, 358
anabolic chemical reactions, 18
anaerobic bacteria, 11
analysis of functional groups
Baeyer’s test, 390
bromine test, 388–9
esterification, 393–4, 396
fractional distillation, 405–7
identifying unknown substances, 398–9
litmus test, 397
melting point determination, 401–3
oxidation, 394–5
purity analysis, 401–7
qualitative tests for carbon–carbon double
bonds, 388–90
qualitative tests for carboxyl groups, 396–8
qualitative tests for hydroxyl functional groups,
392–5
quantitative analysis for carbon–carbon double
bonds, 391–2
reacting with sodium carbonate, 397
simple distillation, 403–5
volumetric analysis, 407–13
analytes, 407
anodes, 100
antiviral medication, 486
atom economy, 368, 370–2, 376–7
Baeyer’s test, 390
banana cake recipe, 28–9
bar graphs, 516–17
batteries, 98
lithium-ion batteries, 110
primary cells, 99, 214
rechargeable batteries, 209
secondary cells, 214–15
see also electrolytic cells; fuel cells;
galvanic cells
benzene, 280–1
β-Carotene, 271
Berthollet, Claude Louis, 181
biocatalysts, 197
biodiesel, 13
bioethanol, 12–13
biofuels
biodiesel, 13
bioethanol, 12–13
biogas, 11
compared to fossil fuels, 14–15
definition, 10
formation, 10
biogas, 11, 135
biomass, 10, 135
blood sample analysis, 444
boiling point
alkyl branches effect on, 322
molar mass effect on, 321
organic compounds, 320–2
bromine test, 388–9
butane derivatives, 313
by-products, 338
calorimeters
calibrating, 57–60
chemical calibration, 57–8
electric calibration, 58–60
invention, 52
overall experimental process, 60–1
calorimetry, 54–5
energy transformation efficiency, 56–9
food and, 67
solution calorimetry, 55–6
carbohydrates, 355
hydrolysis, 361
synthesis, 358
carbolic acids
chemical formula and structure, 305–6
nomenclature, 306
reaction pathways to synthesise, 349
skeletal structure, 307
carbon
as centre of organic chemistry, 258
molecules, 256, 272
origins of organic carbon, 257–8
carbon cycle, 257–8
carbon economy, 17
carbon-13 NMR, 436–7
carbon–carbon double bonds
Baeyer’s test, 390
bromine test, 388–9
qualitative tests, 388–90
quantitative analysis, 391–2
using mole ratio to determine number of
bonds, 392
carbonyl functional group, 298–9
carboxyl functional groups
esterification, 396–8
litmus test, 397
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
qualitative tests, 396–8
reacting with sodium carbonate, 397
catabolic processes, 19
catalysis, 166, 197, 356, 374–6
catalysts, 337
equilibrium and, 194
and rate of reaction, 164–6
catalytic electrodes, 133
cathodes, 100
cellular respiration, 18
link to photosynthesis, 21–2
purpose, 19
types, 19–20
chemical energy, 99
production in nature, 4, 17–20
chemical reactions
causes, 150
collision theory, 154–5
equilibrium. see equilibrium in chemical
reactions
extent of, 179
forward reactions, 178
irreversible reactions, 178, 179
measuring energy released from, 40
open versus closed systems, 153
organic reactions. see organic reactions
rates of reactions, 150. see also reaction rates
reverse reactions, 178
reversible reactions, 178
chemical species, 79
chemical warfare, 336–7
chemistry questions
calculation process for redox titrations, 412–13
comparing and contrasting questions, 216
comparison-based questions, 15
explaining your answer, 325
identifying best reactant to synthesise a
molecule, 352
identifying differences, 216
identifying unknown substances, 398–9
IR spectroscopy questions, 433–4
presenting calculations, 237
structuring answers, 167
types of exam questions, 471–2
using graphs to answer, 156
using key terminology, 449
using precise language, 180
chiral centres, 469–71
chirality, in pharmacology, 468–71
chromatography
blood tests, 444
explained, 445
closed systems, 153
coal, 6
collision theory, 154–5
combustion
common combustion reactions, 43
complete combustion, 27
determining heat energy from fuels, 43–4
of fuels, 27–9
incomplete combustion, 27–8
of methane, 29–31
production of greenhouse gases, 42–3
commercial electrolytic cells, 209
artificial photosynthesis, 230–1
commercial applications of electrolysis, 226–7
production of green hydrogen, 227–9
complete combustion, 27
concentration, and rate of reaction, 159
concept mapping, 86
condensation reactions
drawing, 364
esterification reactions, 355–6
explained, 355
555
to form large biologically important molecules,
356–9
synthesis of carbohydrates, 358–9
synthesis of lipids, 356
synthesis of proteins, 357
continuous data, 511
controlled variables, 503
cooking
chemistry of, 158
as an irreversible reaction, 178
coulombs, 138
crude oil, 9
curcumin, 367
current, 138
cyclic hydrocarbons, 280–1
cyclohexane, 280
data
continuous data, 511
discrete data, 511
primary data, 501–2
qualitative data, 509
quantitative data, 387, 509
resolution, 509
secondary data, 501
dependent variables, 503
dilution, equilibrium and, 193
disaccharides, 358
discrete data, 511
disinfectants, organic versus inorganic, 400
distillation, simple distillation, 403–5, 465
Downs cell, 226–7
dynamic equilibrium, 179
electric charge, units of, 138
electrical energy, 99
electrochemical cells, 99
electrochemical series, 77, 112, 113, 542
limitations of, 118
using to identify reactions in galvanic cells,
116–17
electrode polarity, 100
electrodes, 100–2
catalytic electrodes, 133
inert electrodes in electrolytic cells, 218
porous electrodes, 133
standard electrode potential, 111
standard hydrogen electrodes, 111–12
electrolysis
commercial applications, 226–7
effect of electrolyte concentration, 221–2
electrolytic cells, 211
Faraday’s laws, 231–7
non-standard condition, 221
polymer electrolyte membrane electrolysis, 229
predicting products of, 209, 217–23
using electrochemical series to predict which
reactions will occur, 217
of water, 227–9
electrolyte solutions, 102
electrolytes, molten electrolytes in electrolytic cells,
218, 222–3
electrolytic cells
commercial electrolytic cells. see commercial
electrolytic cells
compared to galvanic cells, 212, 216
concept map, 209
discharge cycle, 214
exhausting supply of reactants, 222
explained, 210
Faraday’s laws of electrolysis, 234–6
features, 209, 211, 213
inert electrodes in, 218
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
556
molten electrolytes in, 218, 222–3
recharge cycle, 214–15
secondary cells, 214–15
electron transfers, 79
electrons, delocalised electrons, 281
electroplating, 226, 234
enantiomers, 468
end point (titration), 410
endothermic reactions, 25–6, 480
energy profile diagrams, representing and
analysing, 32
enthalpy, 25
enthalpy change, 25, 26
enzymes, 12, 337
active sites, 479
as biological catalysts, 478–9
competitive inhibition and function of, 485–6
endothermic reactions, 480
exothermic reactions, 480
factors affecting enzyme activity, 481–6
heartburn and, 474
interaction with substrates, 479–81
pH and function of, 484–6
temperature and function of, 481–3
equilibrium in chemical reactions
calculating the equilibrium constant, 185
calculations involving, 185–6
catalysts and, 194
characteristics of an equilibrium system, 180
competing factors, 195–6
concept map, 177
definition, 179
determining optimal conditions, 196–7
dilution and equilibrium, 193
dynamic equilibrium, 179
effects of external variables, 195
equilibrium constant, K, 183–5
equilibrium expression, 181
gas pressure and, 192–3
homogenous equilibria, 180
Le Chatelier’s principle. see Le Chatelier’s
principle
locating, 182
optimising using green chemical principles,
197–8
position of equilibrium, 179, 184
reaction quotient, 184
reaction quotient, Q, 182–3
relationship between Q and K, 187
temperature and, 191–2
units of reaction quotient and equilibrium
constant, 184
using K to predict changes in equilibrium
position, 194
volume and, 192–3
equivalence point (titration), 410
errors (in chemistry)
random errors, 512
systematic errors, 62–3, 512
types, 62–3
esterification reactions, 355
carboxyl functional groups, 396–8
drawing, 355–6
hydroxyl functional groups, 393–4
esters
characteristics, 307–8
flavour and scent, 354
hydrolysis reactions, 360
naming of, 309
nomenclature, 309
transesterification reactions, 363
ethanol, 287
excess reagents, 28, 31–2
calculations involving, 49–50
exothermic reactions, 25–6, 480
Faraday, Michael, 137
Faraday’s constant, 138
Faraday’s laws, 137–8
calculating current in a cell, 141
calculations of quantities, 130
combined with stoichiometry, 139
Faraday’s laws of electrolysis
calculations using, 235–7
explained, 234–5
theoretical yield versus actual yield, 235
fatty acids, 356
fermentation, 12, 19
first-generation feedstock, 12
flow charts, 398–9
fluids, 324
food
as biochemical energy source, 65–6
and calorimetry, 67
information on energy of, 65
measuring energy from, 40, 65–7
fossil fuels
coal, 6, 7
compared to biofuels, 14–15
definition, 6
formation, 6
natural gas, 6, 8
as non-renewable resources, 6
petroleum, 6, 9
fracking, 6
fractional distillation, 9, 405–7
Franklin, Benjamin, 98
free radicals, 388
fuel cell electric vehicles (FCEVs), 131, 134
fuel cells
advantages, 132
concept map, 130
definition, 132
design features, 132–5
hydrogen, 134
proton-exchange membrane fuel cell, 133
sustainability and environmental considerations,
133–5
types, 132
fuel types
biofuels, 10–13, 14–15
concept map, 4
fossil fuels, 6–9, 14–15
fuels
combustion of, 27–8
definition, 6
determining heat energy from combustion of,
43–4
measuring energy from, 52–3
types. see fuel types
functional group isomers, 268
functional groups (organic compounds), 256, 259
alcohols, 292–5
aldehydes, 301–3
amino functional group, 295–7
analysing molecule names, 315
analysis. see analysis of functional groups
carbolic acids, 305–7
carbonyl functional group, 298–9
drawing and naming, 298
esters, 307–9
explained, 288–9
haloalkanes, 289–91
ketones, 301, 302
naming molecules with two different functional
groups, 312, 314
naming molecules with two identical functional
groups, 311, 314
primary amides, 310
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
galvanic cells
calculating cell potential, 112–14
compared to electrolytic cells, 212
definition, 99
drawing and labelling diagrams, 104, 108
electrodes, 100–2
energy transformation, 99
external circuit, 103
features, 77, 100–3, 105–7
half-cells, 100, 102
identifying reactions using electrochemical
series, 116–17
predicting reactions with moren than one type
of ion present, 119–20
predicting redox reactions in, 115–16
salt bridge, 102–3
gas pressure
equilibrium and, 192–3
and rate of reaction, 159–61
gasification, 135
global warming, 42
glycerol, 356
glycogen, 358, 359
glycosidic bonds, 358
grain alcohol, 287
graphs
bar graphs, 516–17
Maxwell–Boltzmann distribution curve, 163
results graphs, 511, 515–17
scatter plots, 516
using in answers, 156
green chemistry, applying principles, 373
greenhouse effect
enhanced greenhouse effect, 42
natural greenhouse effect, 40, 42
greenhouse gases
definition, 42
lowering emissions for global security, 41
measuring, 40
production, 42–3
Guldberg, Cato, 181
half-equations, 83
haloalkanes
applications, 289
explained, 289
nomenclature, 290–1
skeletal formula, 291
substitution reactions, 339–40
halogenation reactions, 338, 343
hazardous substances, 373
high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC)
calculating unknown concentrations, 447–8
calibration curves, 447
determining relative polarity, 446
explained, 445–6
identification of compounds, 449
mobile phase, 445
purity of compounds, 449
retention time, 445
stationary phase, 445
using key terminology, 449
homogenous equilibria, 180
hydogen-1 NMR, 438–42
hydration reactions, 344–5
hydrocarbons, 271–2
alkanes, 273–7
alkenes, 278–80
bezene, 280–1
cyclic hydrocarbons, 280–1
cyclohexane, 280
degree of saturation, 281–4
saturated hydrocarbons, 273
hydrogen fuel cells, 225
557
hydrogen gas
production of green hydrogen, 227–9
production processes, 225
hydrogenation reactions, 342
hydrohalogenation reactions, 343
hydrolysis reactions
definition, 360
esters, 360
food molecules, 361–2
hydroxyl functional groups
characteristics, 292, 392–3
esterification test, 393–4
oxidation test, 394–5
qualitative tests, 392–5
hypotheses, 503
ICE tables, 185–6
incomplete combustion, 27–8
independent variables, 503
inert materials, 218
information, validity and reliability, 522–3
infrared (IR) spectroscopy
absorption bands, 430
analysis of data, 431–3
explained, 430
fingerpoint region, 431
wavenumbers, 431
instrumental analysis of organic compounds
chromatography, 444–50
infrared spectroscopy, 430–4
mass spectrometry, 424–-9
nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy,
435–43
intermediate compounds, 347
investigative design, structuring a logbook, 501–5
ions, 100
charge of, 140
spectator ions, 339
isomers
branched isomers, 274
and chirality in pharmacology, 468–71
distinguishing between structural isomers and
identical structures, 269–70
enantiomers, 468
functional group isomers, 268
positional isomers, 268
skeletal isomers, 268
structural (constitutional) isomers, 267–8
ketones
chemical formula and structure, 301–2
nomenclature, 303–4
kinetic energy, 154, 320
laptop batteries, 151
Lauterbur, Paul, 435
Lavoisier, Antione, 52, 78
Le Chatelier, Henry-Louis, 189, 190
Le Chatelier’s principle, 177, 189, 190
adding reactant or product, 190–1
dilution and equilibrium, 193
effects of external variables, 195
pressure, volume and equilibrium, 192–3
temperature, enthalpy and equilibrium, 191–2
using K to predict changes in equilibrium
position, 194
limiting reagents, 28, 31–2, 368
and calculating mass of a product, 49–50
determining for methane, 29–30
identifying, 50–1
line of best fit, 59, 516
lipids
hydrolysis, 361
synthesis, 356
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
558
lithium-ion batteries, 110
litmus test, 397
logbooks
accuracy, 512
aim, 502
conclusions of investigations, 513–14
controlled variables, 503
dependent variables, 503
discussion of evidence, 513, 517
health, safety and ethical considerations, 504
hypothesis, 503
independent variable, 503
introduction, 502
investigation extension, 514
investigative design, 501–5
method, 503–4
precision, 513
random errors, 512
repeatability of results, 504
reproducibility of results, 505
research question, 502
results graphs, 511, 515–17
results tables, 510–11, 514–15
scientific evidence, 509–14
systematic errors, 512
validity of results, 505
logical reasoning, 198–9
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), 435
Mansfield, Peter, 435
Mars Curiosity rover, 424
mass action, law of, 181
mass spectrometry
analysis of data, 425–7
base peak, 425
explained, 434–5
identification of compounds, 428–9
molecular ion pea, 425
Maxwell–Boltzmann distribution curve, 163, 165
medicines from nature
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples,
463
antibiotics, 467
extraction of compounds, 464–5
isomers and chirality, 468–71
pain-relieving medication, 466
steroids, 468
melting point
determining, 401–3
organic compounds, 322–3
memory techniques, follow the crocodile, 187
methane, combustion of, 29–31
methanol, 287
mind maps, 231
molar volume, 47
mole ratios, 28
molecules see organic molecules
monomers, 475
monosaccharides, 358
monounsaturated compounds, 391
mustard gas, 336–7
natural gas, 6, 8
non-renewable resources, fossil fuels, 6
non-spontaneous redox reactions, 210
nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy
analysis of data from multiple sources, 442
carbon-13 NMR, 436–7
chemical shift, 436, 438–9, 443
explained, 436
hydrogen-1 NMR, 438–42
identification of compounds, 442
integration curve, 440–1
multiplets, 441
peak splitting, 441–2
open systems, 153
organic compounds
aromatic compounds, 281
boiling point, 320–2
bond strength and stability, 259–61
functional groups, 256, 259
homologous series, 271
hydrocarbons. see hydrocarbons
instrumental analysis. see instrumental analysis
of organic compounds
as medicines. see medicines from nature
melting point, 322–3
molecules. see organic molecules
physical properties, 256
reactions. see organic reactions
representing. see representing organic
compounds
structural diversity, 256, 258–9
sustainable production. see sustainable
production of organic compounds
viscosity, 324–5
organic molecules, 256
alkanes, 273–7
alkenes, 277–80
counting the bonds, 282–3
degree of unsaturation, 282–4
functional groups. see functional groups (organic
compounds)
hydrocarbons, 271
intermolecular forces, 318–20
naming, 285
polyunsaturated molecules, 281
organic reactions
addition reactions of alkenes, 342–6
concept map, 335
condensation reactions, 355–60, 364
explained, 337
hydrolysis reactions, 360–2
oxidation reactions of primary alcohols, 346–7
reaction pathways, 347–51
substitution reactions, 338–40
transesterification reactions, 363
types, 337
oxidation, 77, 78
compared to reduction, 86
definition, 79
oxidation numbers, 20
assigning, 80, 82
identifying reducing agents and oxidising
agents, 82–3
importance of, 86
important considerations when using, 83–4
rules and examples, 81
using, 80, 82–5
writing, 80
oxidation reactions, alcohols, 292–3, 394–5
oxidising agents, 79–80, 346
identifying, 82–3, 84
peptide bonds, 475
peptides, 357
percentage atom economy, 368
percentage yield, 368, 369–70
periodic table, 541
petrol engines, first petrol-driven car in Australia, 4
petroleum, 6, 9
pharmacology, 468
photosynthesis, 18
artificial photosynthesis, 230–1
definition, 6
link to cellular respiration, 21–2
pipelines, preventing corrosion, 217
Pitch drop experiment, 317
plagiarism, 523
polymer electrolyte membrane electrolysis, 229
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
polymers, 475
polypeptides, 475
polysaccharides, 358
polyunsaturated molecules, 282, 391
porous electrodes, 133
positional isomers, 268
potential difference, 111
Priestly, Joseph, 78
primary alcohols, 292–3, 346–7, 393
primary amines, 310
definition, 295
nomenclature, 296–7
reaction pathways to synthesise, 348
skeletal formula, 297
primary cells, 99, 214
primary data, 501–2
proteins
bonds associated with protein levels, 478
definition, 355
hydrolysis, 361
primary structure, 476
quaternary structure, 478
secondary structure, 476
synthesis, 357
tertiary structure, 477
proton NMR, 438–42
purity of a product
analysing, 401–7
fractional distillation, 405–7
HPLC analysis, 449
melting point determination, 401–3
simple distillation, 403–5
qualitative data, 387, 509
quantitative analysis, 387
quantitative data, 509
questions see chemistry questions
random errors, 62–3, 512
reactants, 368
reaction pathways
designing, 350–1
explained, 347
identifying best reactant to synthesise a
molecule, 352
to synthesise carbolic acids, 349
to synthesise primary amines, 348
reaction rates, 152–3
catalysts and, 164–6
chemistry of cooking, 158
concentration and, 159
effects on, 158
gas pressure and, 159–61
surface area and, 161–2
temperature and, 162–4
reagents, 338
limiting and excess reagents, 28–32
see also excess reagents; limiting reagents
rechargeable batteries, 210
redox, explained, 79
redox couples, identifying, 84–5
redox equations, writing, 77
balanced half-equations from full redox
reactions, 94–5
balancing in acidic conditions, 90–1
balancing in basic conditions, 91–2
combining half-equations, 93
complex half-equations, 90–2
key things to check, 95–6
KOHES acronym, 90
simple half-equations, 86–90
redox pairs, conjugate redox pairs, 100–1
redox reactions, 79, 88
559
reducing agents, 79–80
identifying, 82–3, 84
reduction, 77
compared to oxidation, 86
definition, 79
reference lists, 521–3
Relenza, 486
renewable feedstocks, 135, 367, 373–4
renewable resources, biofuels as, 10
repeatability of results, 504
representing organic compounds
molecular formula, 261
semi-structural formula, 262–3
skeletal formula, 263–6
structural (constitutional) isomers, 267–8
structural formula, 261, 262
reproducibility of results, 505
results graphs, 511, 515–17
results tables, 510–11, 514–15
saponification reactions, 360
scatter plots, 516
scientific communication, communicating your
work, 520
scientific evidence
accuracy, 512
conclusion, 513–14
discussion, 513, 517
investigation extension, 514
precision, 513
random errors, 512
results graphs, 511, 515–17
results tables, 510–11, 514–15
structuring a logbook, 509–14
systematic errors, 512
scientific methodologies, 505
classification and identification, 506
fieldwork, 506–7
modelling and simulation, 507
product, process or system development, 508
scientific posters, template, 520–2
secondary alcohols, 393
secondary data, 501
significant figures
adding and subtracting, 223
checking, 68
simple distillation, 465
Simvastatin, 486
single-variable explorations, 505
skeletal isomers, 268
skills, comparison-based questions, 15
solvent extraction, 463, 464
specific heat capacity, 52–3
spectator ions, 339
stalactites, 151
standard electrode potential, 111
standard hydrogen electrodes, 111–12
standard laboratory conditions, 47
standard solutions, preparation, 407–8
starch, 358
stoichiometric calculations, 28
stoichiometric reagents, 374
stoichiometry
calculations involving limiting and excess
reagents, 49–50
converting from different units, 45–6
definition, 44
mass–mass stoichiometry, 46–7
mass–volume stoichiometry, 47–8
volume–volume stoichiometry, 48–9
substitution reactions, 338–40
substrates, 479
surface area, and rate of reaction, 161–2
sustainable production of organic compounds
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
560
applying green chemistry principles, 373
catalysis, 374–6
designing safer chemicals, 375–6
evaluating efficiency of reactions and
pathways, 368–72
renewable feedstocks, 373–4
systematic errors, 62–3, 512
tables
ICE tables, 185–6
results tables, 510–11, 514–15
using for comparisons, 136
temperature
equilibrium and, 191
and rate of reaction, 162–4
tertiary alcohols, 393
thalidomide, 470–1, 479
theoretical yield, 368
titrants, 407
titration
calculations, 411–13
indicators, 410
performing, 408–9
preparation of standard solutions, 407–8
transesterification reactions, 363
triglycerides, 13, 356
turmeric, 367
types, organic fuels, 6
ultraviolet light, 338
unit conversions, 142
valence electron number, 258
valence electrons, 258
valence shell electron pair repulsion (VSEPR), 258
valence shells, 258
validity
of information, 522–3
of results, 505
vapour pressure, 320
viscosity, organic compounds, 324–5
Volta, Alessandro, 98
voltage, 111
voltmeters, 103
volume, equilibrium and, 192–3
volumetric analysis, 407
titration experiments, 407–13
Waage, Peter, 181
wood alcohol, 287
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
561
Permissions acknowledgments
The author and publisher wish to thank the following sources for permission to reproduce material:
Cover: © Getty Images / mikroman6
Images: © Getty Images / Nora Carol Photography, Chapter 1 Opener / Rundstedt B. Rovillos, 1A-2 / Fentino,
p.6 / Douglas Sacha, p.7 / wetcake, 1A-4 / Olga Rolenko, p.9 / Jacqueline Anders, p.10 / Westend61,
1A-6(1) / zhuweiyi49, 1A-6(2) / Valentin Valkov / 500px, 1A-6(3) / zhuweiyi49, 1A-6(4) / Miray Celebi
Kaba, 1A-6(5) / bubaone, 1A-6(6) / P.Domain / Wouter Hagens, 1A-6(7) / Daria Nipot, p.16 / Rassco, 1B-1
/ Maryna Terletska, p.20 / VectorMine, 1B-4 / NANOCLUSTERING/SCIENCE PHOTO LIBRARY, p.22 / Kilito
Chan, p.24(1) / gacooksey, p.24(2) / Randy Faris, p.26 / Peter Dazeley, 1C-2(1) / Germano Poli / EyeEm,
1C-2(2) / Science Photo Library, 1C-2(3) / Westend61, p.30 / TEK IMAGE/SCIENCE PHOTO LIBRARY,
Chapter 2 Opener / Alexander Spatari, p.40 / John W Banagan, p.43 / Ashley Cooper, p.44 / nikamata,
p.56 / WLADIMIR BULGAR/SCIENCE PHOTO LIBRARY, 2B-4 / Jeffrey Coolidge, p.59 / skynesher, p.64 /
Alexander Spatari, 2C-1 / Alicia Llop, p.67 / miniseries, p.69 / WLADIMIR BULGAR/SCIENCE PHOTO
LIBRARY, p.73 / Roberto Sorin Opreanu / EyeEm, Chapter 3 Opener / Photo 12 / Contributor, 3A-1 / Matej
Kastelic, p.85 / Ian Logan, p.87 / Javier Zayas Photography, 3B-1(1) / DustyPixel, 3B-1(2) / WIN-Initiative/
Neleman, 3B-2 / Kryssia Campos, p.94 / Arthur S. Aubry, p.97 / Ipsumpix / Contributor, 3C-1 / Xvision,
3C-2 / haryigit, 3C-5 / Jose Luis Pelaez, p.104 / Jose A. Bernat Bacete, p.109 / Simon McGill, p.110(1) /
Comstock, p.121 / Getty Images, Chapter 4 Opener / gchutka, 4A-1(1) / Smith Collection/Gado / Contributor,
4A-1(2) / Andriy Onufriyenko, 4A-3 / gui00878, 4A-5 / ljubaphoto, p.140 / Jorg Greuel, p.141 / Adrienne
Bresnahan, Chapter 5 Opener / Vicente Barraquet Gil / EyeEm, 5A-1(1) / Oscar Wong, 5A-1(2) / sinology,
p.157 / LauriPatterson, p.158 / Adrienne Bresnahan, p.166 / AzmanL, p.172 / GIPhotoStock, p.173 /
B. Tanaka, Chapter 6 Opener / Laurie Ambrose, p.178 / Bill Oxford, 6A-1 / Pannonia, p.181 / Anchalee
Phanmaha, p.184, p.188 / Oleksandra Yagello, p.189 / Martin Poole, 6C-11 / GIPhotoStock, p.205 / Andy
Freer, Chapter 7 Opener / Peter Dazeley, p.210 / CHRISTOPH BURGSTEDT/SCIENCE PHOTO LIBRARY,
p.212 / spooh, p.217 / Alexandra Lazar / 500px, p.220 / onurdongel, 7C-1(1) / audioundwerbung, 7C-1(2) /
TarikVision, 7C-4 / haryigit, 7C-5 / Jasmin Merdan, p.233 / Creative Crop, p.234(1) / wbritten, p.234(2) /
Bobex-73, p.234(3) / Andriy Onufriyenko, p.243 / Tetra Images, Chapter 8 Opener / REDA&CO / Contributor,
8B-1 / THOM LEACH / SCIENCE PHOTO LIBRARY, p.276 / Kinga Krzeminska, 8B-4(1) / Simon Murrell,
8B-4(2) / mrs, 8B-4(3) / Ivan, 8C-1 / NickS, 8C-5 / Ted Horowitz Photography, p.299 / Buddy Mays, 8D-9(a) /
Eskay Lim / EyeEm, 8D-9(b) / Nenov, 8D-13(1) / imran kadir photography, 8D-13(2) / Science Photo
Library, 8D-13(3) / Andrew Brookes, p.312 / Capelle.r, 8E-4(1) / ilbusca, 8E-4(2) / sanjeri, p.322 / Fuse,
8E-11(1) / Elizaveta Antropova, 8E-11(2) / HakanEliacik / 500px, 8E-11(3) / San Francisco Chronicle/
Hearst Newspapers via Getty Images / Contributor, 8E-12(b) / miguelangelortega, Chapter 9 Opener / George
Doyle, 9A-11 / AlexanderFord, 9A-19 / Chadchai Krisadapong, 9A-20 / Westend61, p.351 / Os Tartarouchos,
p.354 / AngiePhotos, p.362 / ATU Images, p.366 / Westend61, 9C-1 / Rakdee, 9C-3(1) / Nadiinko, 9C-
3(2) / Olga Kurbatova, 9C-3(3) (4) / , 9C-3(5) / Dimitris66, 9C-3(6) / ulimi, 9C-3(7) /
Nadiinko, 9C-3(8) / grafikazpazurem, 9C-3(10) / Shams Suleymanova, 9C-3(11) / arcady_31, 9C-3(12) /
fonikum, Table 9C-1(1) / Magnilion, Table 9C-1(2) / -VICTOR-, Table 9C-1(3) / RLT_Images, Table 9C-1(4) /
Puneet Vikram Singh, Nature and Concept photographer, p.377 / Witthaya Prasongsin, p.378 / KTSDesign/
SCIENCEPHOTOLIBRARY, Chapter 10 Opener / Rundstedt B. Rovillos, 10A-1(1) / Paul Bradbury, 10A-1(2) /
Alexander Spatari, 10A-1(3) / George Diebold, p.391 / Andrii Medvediuk / EyeEm, 10B-1 / Flavius Vladimiri /
500px, p.408 / HadelProductions, p.410 / GIPhotoStock, p.416 / Horacio Villalobos / Contributor,
Chapter 11 Opener / Ignatiev, 11A-1 / Monty Rakusen, p.429 / powerofforever, 11B-1 / Morsa Images, 11C-1 /
SolStock, p.436 / SIGRID GOMBERT/SCIENCE PHOTO LIBRARY, p.438 / Peter Dazeley, p.444 /
MICROGEN IMAGES/SCIENCE PHOTO LIBRARY, p.449 / HPuschmann, p.451 / Monty Rakusen, p.457 /
Andrew Brookes, p.467 / Alexandre Morin-Laprise, p.474 / Peter Dazeley, 12B-17 / CHRISTOPH
BURGSTEDT/SCIENCE PHOTO LIBRARY, p.489 / Andrew Brookes, Chapter 13 Opener / Kim Steele, 13A /
AzmanL, p.501 / s96serg, p.518 / wera Rodsawang, p.523 / Solskin, p.532; Museums Victoria,
https://collections.museumsvictoria.com.au/items/1720830, 1A-1; IEA, Total biofuel production by feedstock,
main case, 2021-2027, IEA, Paris https://www.iea.org/data-and-statistics/charts/total-biofuel-production-by-
feedstock-main-case-2021-2027, IEA. Licence: CC BY 4.0, 1A-5; CC BY 2.0 / Presidencia de la República
Mexicana, 2A-1; P.Domain / U.S. Food and Drug Administration, p.69; © State of Victoria (Department of
Environment, Land, Water and Planning), p.110(2); P.Domain / The Illustrated London news. v.28 1856
Jan-Jun. p.177, 4B-1; CC BY-SA 4.0 /Dnn87, 5B-4(1); Phil Degginger / Alamy Stock Photo, 5B-4(2);
P.Domain / Captain Frank Hurley, 9A-2; ANDREW LAMBERT PHOTOGRAPHY / SCIENCE PHOTO LIBRARY,
p.386; Science History Images / Alamy Stock Photo, 12A-1; CC BY-SA 4.0 / Mark Marathon, 12A-2(1);
Excitations / Alamy Stock Photo, 12A-2(2); GIPhotoStock, p.251; Sanjeri, p.535; Yulia Reznikov, p.540.
Every effort has been made to trace and acknowledge copyright. The publisher apologises for any accidental
infringement and welcomes information that would redress this situation.
Extracts from the VCE Chemistry study design (2023-2027) reproduced by permission; © VCAA. VCE is a
registered trademark of the VCAA. The VCAA does not endorse or make any warranties regarding this study
resource. Current VCE Study Designs and related content can be accessed directly at www.vcaa.vic.edu.au .
Readers are also advised to check for updates and amendments to VCE Study Designs on the VCAA website
and via the VCAA Bulletin and the VCAA Notices to Schools.
ISBN 978-1-009-22984-5
Drummond et al Photocopying is restricted under law and this material must not be transferred to another party.
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023